A Fan’s Notes

knocking a couple of her teeth out right at the bar of the Pickwick
Arms Hotel in Greenwich. They say that a little bit of a man,
a stranger, once beat him half to death in the very same bar
and that the patrons rose en masse and applauded.” Patience
paused for a breath, trying to determine whether her tone
should be harsh or sympathetic. “He loved cats, though,” she
said. “And he sure as heck proved the maxim about being
destroyed by what one loves.”

Every Wednesday or Thursday I received the post card and :
the package containing the latest masterpiece of Ayn Rand, ;
Sloan Wilson, Grace Metalious, the Irvings—Wallace and
Stone—and what must have been the works of every writer
in the Grove Press stable. No matter how much I protested
his generosity to Bumpy, or told him if he had to send
something I'd much prefer mysteries, he wouldn’t hear of it,
explaining that, “Wanting to be a writer and all, you should
read good stuff—maybe you'll learn somethin’! If only how to I
dive in the bush! Har! Har! Har!” '
Weekends in the bars Bumpy introduced me to bartenders
and acquaintances with the pride of a lecherous octogenarian
presenting a young and ravishing bride. He’d beam salaciously. 
“This here’s my brother-in-law. He’s a writer! There
ain’t nothin’ he don’t know!” Soon I understood that, though —
I wasn’t expected to volunteer mots, with the wisdom of —
eternal woman I was expected to arbitrate barroom disputes
and have at my fingertips such esoteric information as what
Yankee pitcher’s World Series no-hitter had been under-
mined by the Dodgers’ Cookie Lavagetto, the populations of
pre- and post-World War II Warsaw, and the number of islands 
comprising the Republic of Indonesia. During a lull in
the conversation, Bumpy once called me into the floodlighted
downstage area. “Tell these swine that line about Minerva,”
he said. “Now, listen here, Bumpy,” I said; but before I could
prevent him, he was priming the audience for the showstopper,
 explaining how Minerva was in the “bughouse” and
how Scott Fitzgerald, “you know, the writer,” wrote this “gol
dang great line” in a letter. “Now, tell them,” he ordered. My
face red, my eyes cast downward, I obediently mumbled the
words for fear of being taken for a damp-souled, unaccommodating chap. 
“That ain’t the way he usually says it!” Bumpy
excoriated me to my audience. In the station wagon going to
the next bar, I said, “Bumpy, you’ve got to stop this nonsense
about my being a writer and making me repeat that Fitzgerald
line. In the first place, I’ve never had anything published. In
the second place, it’s embarrassing as hell. I mean, I suppose
every one of those guys has heard that line before.” I wanted
to add, “Everyone’s not as finger-lickin’ uncouth as you.”
“You're absolutely right,” Bumpy agreed, but his agreement
had nothing to do with anything I’d just said. “Lines like that
are just wasted on swine like those guys. They're not like us—
sensitive and all.”

For the most part Bumpy demanded nothing of me save
that like a young bride I sit at the bar, obediently sip my drink,
look pleasingly discerning and attractive, and exude intimations of
 possessing recondite sexual expertise. Fortunately for
me, Bumpy had no capacity for not upstaging all the bit players, 
including myself, with whom he came in contact. Ludicrously attired 
in a straw boater, a red suede vest making
his stomach look like a rubescent mosquito’s ripe for bursting,
his faded and frayed Levi’s, and a pair of glossy paratrooper
boots, on entering a place he would make a direct, nearly
maniacal line for the biggest assemblage of talkers at the bar,
an assemblage that on spotting him seemed to shrivel visibly,
to grow troubled and wan, to exude an unmistakable aura of
sniffing recoil. To all of which reaction I invariably smiled.
Young advertising men and bond salesmen, they were in their
twenties and thirties, some in their forties; they wore Paul
Stuart or J. Press jackets and bow ties; they puffed suavely at