

dungarees, and a royal-blue, zippered sweatshirt; piled the
marble-topped coffee table adjacent to the davenport high
with long-neglected volumes; walked into the kitchen and
from the pantry closet removed a package of Oreo Creme
Sandwiches; returned to the living room and flicked on the
television, which after a momentary lull began its incessant
and hypnotic drone; invited Christie III, my mother’s saucereyed, 
russet-and-white cocker spaniel to share the davenport
at my feet; and then lay down until the spring of 1958.
In a land where movement is virtue, where the echo of heels
clacking rapidly on pavement is inordinately blest, it is a
grand, defiant, and edifying gesture to lie down for six months.
Lying with my legs wide apart, I saw what I saw of the
world—a sad-eyed, bewildered canine—through the weary
V of my feet. With my neck comfortably braced up by luxurious, 
pliant cushions, I lay with my left hand on my crotch, my
fingertips conscious of the inert penis through the coarse
denim of the dungarees. A supernumerary check of the member’s reality, 
there was nothing erotic in the gesture.’ It was a
palliative. In it there was something of the parvenu Scanning
“and rescanning his accounts, as though those soothing figures
had no reality beyond his sight. Awakening to my body for the
first time, I heard the rhythmical, occasionally syncopated,
and always audible contortions of my heart, now and then
hearing from beneath the monstrously hot layers of flesh the
plangent and ominous rumblings of unimaginable visceral
parts. I made sublime discoveries. I learned, for example, to
distinguish between the odor of a sweat produced in a passion
of labor or love and that of the effluvium from the stationary
body, the latter having a foul, self-conscious stench. After
a time I became acclimated to the stench, to the hotness of my
flesh, to its alien rumblings; and by then I had drifted into a
subliminal world and was insensible to touch or odor or taste
or sound or sight, so that the immediate world—this penis, this