

injustice in the form of the intestate uncle. The differences are not Of
character but of dimensions, convenience or mere disguise; i
Thomas is an ambitious young man of intellectual leanings caught al
cross purposes and fully aware of the ethical fine points at stake in Ml
demand for justice, whereas Randal is cast in a simpler mould, 
reflecting the vacant stare of the motion picture audience in its 
acquaintance with greed undiluted by any exercise of the intellect let
alone the bewildering thicket of Socratic dialogue. Where the play has I
mind to edify, the picture sets out to entertain; thus Giulielma, Thomas!
touching and desolate bride, finds her tempestuous ful! bosomed co
terpart on the screen composed to arouse those appetites that will
their vicarious reward in the rape scene. Similarly, the sympathetic stag
portrait of the Major as a genteel if self serving Southern aristocrat not
unfamiliar in the literature, becomes that of a scheming rural drunk
familiar from the small screen of television, and his son a mean figure
of weakness and spite who is portrayed on the stage as a complete
mixture of thwarted and divided love and loyalties. Even the part o
Mr Bagby, a study in the business as usual corruption that ushered If
Reconstruction and flourishes among US today as the beau ideal, 1S
taken by a comic Italian stereotype reflecting, perhaps, no more the
the mirth provoking possibilities provided by each successive wave
immigration, where were the story set in our own time his name would
be Jimenez. Only the mother remains the same consistently unpleasant
presence from one incarnation to the next, though her message delivered
 at the opening of the play does not come until later in the picture
with its full impact when the two have parted company altogether. The
Negro boy at her knee in the play has all but disappeared in the picture
there being no need to explore Rousseau's views on freedom; and
Kane of the play is entirely absent from the picture where Crito WOUl
be as unhappy a stranger as King Tut. }

The main action of the play commences well after that of the picture
with the hero's return from battle to the news of his inheritance. Rat!
than marking a difference however, this draws them the closer, sl
the play's opening dialogue summing up all that has gone before
reads like the scenario written for and played out in the picture. F
the mother's bleak recounting of the event, we behold on the screen
hero driving their shabby equipage Up the plantation drive ‘as if hi
owned the place’ only to be sent on his way by a disdainful black to t
dilapidated farm, where their struggle against adversity is depicted
the ensuing montage as a long pantomime of privation with music
flourishes unaided by the spoken word. The first voice we hear is th
the ravishing heiress next door, taking him by surprise while out hunting
though from her demeanor and subsequent actions we gather that she
is not. In calculated contrast to Thomas’ poetic recounting of this scene
in the play, confronted the girl's wayward loneliness, the man on the
 screen turns the tanned and perspiring badges of his low estate to 
advantage bringing her down from her arrogant seat on a pawing Stallion 
to be found in short order undoing his overalls and, in the
currency from its high Joycean

Following a lavish wedding and his installation at Cross Creek with his
bride's unsavoury relations, the clouds of war loom over the happy couple, 
preparing us for the full scale screen spectacle of battle at Ball's
Bluff.

where his humiliation out hunting food for the table conphrase that has caught
literary pedigree, ‘making a man of him.

We may note that at this point in the picture the main action of the
play has not even begun, and nothing has been offered by defendants
as evidence taken from the far in tracking the picture to the play 
to arouse Our doubts regarding the particular plan, arrangement and 
combination of materials’ in defendants’ product in the light of
 Nutt v. National Institute Incorporated for the Improvement of Memory,
court observed, {clopying is not confined to a literal representation but
public domain, yet we need only come this 2d Circ. 31 F.2d 236, 238 where the
includes various modes in which the matter of any publication may be
adopted, imitated or transferred with more or less colourable alteration.’
the matter of dialogue versus action portrayed, or as alleged in the
instant case employed as a blueprint for such portrayal, has enjoyed
many variations in infringement actions, quoting the author's description
of the infringing scene in Chappell & Co. v. Fields, 2d Circ., 210 F. 864
where ‘Jn the plaintiffs play the idea that B was deliberately bound
io the track with the intention of having him killed by the train was
conveyed by the joint effect of the language spoken and movements
performed in accordance with the written directions; while in the
defendant's play the same idea was conveyed solely by the language
uttered. The action, the narrative, the dramatic effect, the impression
created and the series of events In the two scenes were identical.’ Thus
(we have often decided that a play may be pirated without using the
dialogue. (Sheldon v. Metro-Goldwyn Pictures, supra, citations omitted.)
Were it not so, there could be no piracy of a pantomime, where there
eannot be any dialogue; yet nobody would deny to pantomime the
name of drama. Speech is only a small part of a dramatists’ means of
expression; he draws on all the arts and compounds his play from
words and gestures and scenery and costume and from the very looks
of the actors themselves.’ Yet even as here quoting Judge Hand in their
defense, appellees rather strengthen the case for the plaintiff as they