
tens of millions in coverage but you've kept raising your
deductibles to meet your premiums up twenty percent last year probably
another twenty or thirty this one and zero for your legal costs fighting
malpractice suits growing like weeds wherever you...

Harry! I mean why are you telling me all this about millions in
suctibles and God knows else I can’t even...

Just told you Christina! Firm’s liable means the partners are liable,
i firm gets sued means you're not just accountable for your own work

—Well my God Harry, I mean they can’t fire you, you said once ire stuck 
for the work of other partners you’ve probably never even

—Talking about being sucked under when the whole ship goes Het,

Christina, last few years eight or ten top firms have gone dar " 
Well that’s the most ridic, I mean you never told me all this I don’t
dozen more ready to go right now, small firms wiped out all oy Bn...
place, expartners out on the street who shed their blood for the I .

-Didn’t want to drag you through it, you don’t even want to hear it all
worries and legal battles brought on by some venerable old ii do you?
 What I’m trying to tell you, risking everything you've got, billing four hundred 
fifty an hour for making bad decisions I wie, pension rights, bonus profit shares 
everything you own, why our nothing to do with while he puts in for twenty five hundred
Sam there owns nothing but the clothes on his back, town house, the year, takes home about
 a third of the million that he brings in 4, sailboat, summer place they’re building right 
over here in Southampfirm to pay out overhead and bonuses on the rest of the three hu put it all in his wife’s name.
million pouring in from all their other accounts and then the I Charming Harry, perfectly charming.

partners sit down under the Christmas tree and share the profits, — What do you mean charming, what else could he...

—Well what makes you think Swyne and, where are you going, I mean our friend Sam Harry! I mean these malpractice suits spring-

—Told you, make some more coffee. 4, up like weeds I mean you standing right there talking Oscar out of

—Lily can make some more coffee and Lily? some more t iWinging a malpractice suit worried about Sam, about our friend Sam and
you'll clean up that tray? I mean what makes you think they 1s whole revolting self regulating conspiracy is that when he did it?
you if the old tub sinks, you’re not running General Motors are yo =—Did what, I don't...

—Don’t understand Christina look, that’s the point. You’re ‘ Put everything in his wife’s name so he wouldn't have to give Oscar
tected by limited liability like you are with a corporation, state r ‘thing but the shirt off his back and a box of dead fish how can you tell
on these partnership forms you’re wide open, the firm’s liable m e this!
you're liable, insurance protection’s like throwing your drowning sil Not talking about Sam I'm talking about us, things go sour we could
lifesaver, a firm with two hundred lawyers at five or six thousand a ff in the same...
there’s over a million in premiums right there. All those massive I _-We? you’re putting everything in my name is that how all this started?
while ago firms like mine were hiring right out of law school fattenit Started with me sitting down with Bill Peyton didn’t it? Started with,
on those billion dollar mergers and takeovers, wild real estate deals, I «ll you what it started with it started when I heard Mudpye had turned
office space and computer networks for these multinational acco wn partner, broke his neck to make partner they just handed it to him
whole thing dries up overnight and the government regulators ste 1d he turned it down, had second thoughts and he turned it down.
catch some monstrous financial institution cooking their books and y veaking mine for senior partner I’m having a few second thoughts too,
part of the act because we'd advised them so down go earnings anc I Bill Peyton I want to see the firm’s balance sheets, bank borrowings,
ribbon reputations paying out fines and settlements on these suits ision liabilities, insurance, problem clients, just take your friend Trish
Justice Department and a few thousand bitter investors first thing obably in for a few hundred thousand by now hasn’t put up a dime
know youre... 7 luit's she going to do, wait till they sue her?

—Harry? _~'They may just wait until she sues them.

—You're paying these million, five million dollar claims from y _-Not funny Christina now look, I brought her in there and...

bleeding to death I can cancel in an instant. Here’s the problemi
scene right now’s like sailing through the strait of Messina betweer
and Charybdis. You make partner, make senior partner with a fi
reputable white shoe firm used to mean you were set for life, no Ww
got the sea monster’s cave on one side and a whirlpool on th
liability as a partner you’re on board risking being devoured
monstrous suits and government regulators or sucked under and «i
in the unemployment pool.