

have shown. Work songs and military cadence calls* make long
marches or repetitive tasks less boring. Solo joggers, fast-walkers,
people schussing on cross-country ski machines, astronauts pedaling
stationary bikes in space, leotard-clad aerobics classes, all get psyched
up from exercising to loud music that has a regular, pounding beat.
A campfire wouldn’t be as exciting if it were silent. And, when the
campers launch their floating candles upon the lake at sunset at the
end of the summer, they usually accompany the ritual with a hymn-
like song of devotion to camp and one other. People want certain
foods (potato chips, pretzels, cereals, and the like) to crunch; noise
is an important ingredient in the marketing of such foods. Music
accompanies weddings, funerals, state occasions, religious holidays,
sports, even television news. Paid choirs sing poignant anthems to
homeowner’s insurance, laundry soap, and toilet paper. On a busy
street at rush hour, despite the growl of traffic and the gyrations of
thousands of hurrying strangers, we can still recognize the voice of
a friend who comes up behind us and says hello. As we stroll along
the reimagined streets of Williamsburg, Virginia, we hear a melodic
clanging and recognize at once the sound of a blacksmith hammering
 on an anvil. Sitting in a chair in the living room, idly stroking
the cat while sunlight streams through a window rimed with froal,
may be relaxing, but when we hear the cat purr loudly we feel evel
more contented. Most restaurants serve obligatory music with evety
course; some even hire violinists or guitarists to stand at your table
and ladle out enormous helpings of music as you chew. In the lobbiag
of hotels in India, and on the slate patios of Houston, wind chinet
tinkle in the breeze. During so-called silent hours, the inmates #

*Carol Burke, a folklorist researching military marching chants, sie this typical one, M
of them, she informs me, are equally crude, repetitive, and insulting.

Rich girl uses tampons
Poor girl uses rags j
But Lulu’s cunt’s so goddariii

She uses burlap bags.

Rich girl uses Vaseline

Poor girl uses lard

But Lulu uses axle grease
And bangs ‘em twice as hard

Bang, bang Lulu

Bang, bang Lulu Bang away all day, etc.

Bang away all day
Bang, bang Lulu
Who ya gonna bang today?

Hearing

477,

- Alcatraz managed to whisper into the empty water pipe that led
from sink to sink and then put an ear to the pipe to hear. Hikers
Mama-trekking along Point Reyes National Seashore in California, or
climbing the boulder face of Mount Camelback in Pennsylvania,
evel alike in the sounds of birds, river rapids, skirling wind, dry
‘seedpods rattling on the trees like tiny gourds. In the robust festivity
of a dinner party, a waiter pours a luscious Liebfraumilch, whose
apricot blush we behold, whose bouquet we inhale, whose savory
fruitiness we taste. Then, wishing one another well, we clink our
glasses together because sound is the only sense missing from our full
enjoyment of the wine.

What we call “sound” is really an onrushing, cresting, and withdrawing 
wave of air molecules that begins with the movement of any
object, however large or small, and ripples out in all directions. First
mething has to move—a tractor, a cricket’s wings—that shakes
tree colorfully named bones (the hammer, the anvil, and the stirip), 
the tiniest bones in the body. Although the cavity they sit in
only about a third of an inch wide and a sixth of an inch deep,
¢ air trapped there by blocked Eustachian tubes is what gives scuba
vers and airplane passengers such grief when the air pressure
nges. The three bones press fluid in the inner ear against memines, 
which brush tiny hairs that trigger nearby nerve cells, which
telegraph messages to the brain: We hear. It may not seem like a
larly complicated route, but in practice it follows an elaborate
ay that looks something like a maniacal miniature golf course,
curlicues, branches, roundabouts, relays, levers, hydraulics, and
back loops.

Sound is transmitted in three stages. The outer ear acts as a funnel
tch and direct it, though many people lacking outer ears hear
fine (as one usually can even wearing a hat or helmet). When
ound waves hit the fanlike eardrum, it moves the first tiny bone,
¢ head fits in the cuplike socket on the second, which then
es the third, which presses like a piston against the soft, fluid-