 When scientists, philosophers, and other commentators speak of the real world, 
they're talking about a myth, a convenient fiction. The world is a construct
the brain builds based on the sensory information it’s given, and the
information is only a small part of all that’s available. We can modify
our senses through bat detectors, binoculars, telescopes, and microscopes, 
broadening that sensory horizon, and there are instruments
that allow us to become a kind of sensory predator that natural
selection never meant us to be. Physicists explain that molecules are
always moving: The book in front of you is actually squirming under
your fingertips. But we don’t see this motion at that molecular level,
because it’s not evolutionarily important that we do. We're given
only the sensory information crucial to our survival.

Evolution didn’t overload us with unnecessary abilities. For example: 
We may use numbers in the millions and trillions, but they are
basically meaningless to us. Many things are unavailable to us 
because they’re not part of our distant evolutionary background. In an
odd way, one-celled animals may have a more realistic sense of the
world than higher animals do, because they respond to every stimulus 
they encounter. 

We, on the other hand, select only a few. The body edits and prunes 
experience before sending it to the brain for contemplation or action. 
Not every whim of the wind triggers the hair on the wrist to quiver. 
Not every vagary of sunlight registers on the retina. Not everything we 
feel is felt powerfully enough to send a message to the brain; the rest 
of the sensations just wash over us, telling us nothing. Much is lost 
in translation, or is censored, and in any case our nerves don’t all 
fire at once. Some of them remain silent, while others respond. 
This makes our version of the world somewhat simplistic,  given how complex 
the world is. The body’s quest isn’t for truth, it’s for survival.

Our senses also crave novelty. Any change alerts them, and they
send a signal to the brain. If there’s no change, no novelty, they doze
and register little or nothing. The sweetest pleasure loses its thrill if
it continues too long. A constant state—even of excitement—in
time becomes tedious, fades into the background, because our senses
have evolved to report changes, what’s new, something startling that
has to be appraised: a morsel to eat, a sudden danger. The body tak
stock of the world like an acute and observant general ee
through a complex battleground, looking for patterns and aa
gems. So it is not only possible but inevitable that a person will grow
used to a city’s noises and visual commotion and not register these
stall constantly. On the other hand, novelty itself will always rivet
one’s attention. There is that unique moment when one confronts
something new and astonishment begins.

Whatever it is, it looms brightly, its edges sharp, its details ravishing, 
just beholding it is a form of revelation, a new sensory litan a
tlie second time one sees it, the mind says, Oh, that again, another moon landing. 
And soon, when it’s been commonplace, the brain begins slurring the details 
recognizing it too quickly, by just a few of its features; it doesn’t hive to make
scrutinizing it Then it is lost to astonishment, no longer an extraordinary instance 
but a generalized piece of the landscape.

Mastery is what we strive for, but once we have it we lose the keen
superawareness of the amateur. “It’s old hat,” we say, as if such an
old, weatherbeaten article of clothing couldn’t yield valle insights
about its wearer and the era in which it was created and a:
Old news,” we say, even if the phrase is an oxymoron. News is Be
and should sound an alarm in our minds. When it becomes old, what
happens to its truth? “He’s history,” we say, Meaning that saying
is no longer new for us, no longer fresh and stimulating, but banished
to the world of fossil and ruin. So much of our life passes in a
comfortable blur. Living on the senses requires an easily triggered
sense of marvel, a little extra energy, and most people are lazy ha
life. Life is something that happens to them while they wait f
death. Many millennia from now, will we evolve into people who se
perceive the world differently, employ the senses differently, and
perhaps know the world more intimately? Or will those Bas,
perhaps further away from any physical sense of the world, envy i
the passionate and thrill-seeking ones, who gorged on life,
dense by sense, dream by dream?

Hold a glance a little longer than usual, let the eyes smolder and
a smile creep onto the lips, and a small toboggan run forms in the