
and soon enough there were revolts against these revolts. Food has
always been associated with cycles of sexuality, moral abandon,
moral restraint, and a return to sexuality once again—but no one did
so with as much flagrant gusto as the ancient Romans.

Quite possibly the Roman empire fell because of lead poisoning,
which can cause miscarriages, infertility, a host of illnesses, and
insanity. Lead suffused the Romans’ lives—not only did their water
pipes, cooking pots, and jars contain it, but also their cosmetics. But
before it did poison them, they staged some of the wildest and most
extravagant dinner parties ever known, where people dined lying
down, two, three, or more to a couch. While saucy Roman poets like
Catullus wrote rigorously sexy poems about affairs with either sex,
Ovid wrote charming ones about his robust love of women, how they
tormented his soul, and about the roller coaster of flirtation he
observed at dinner parties. “Offered a sexless heaven,” he wrote, “‘I’d
say no thank you, women are such sweet hell.” In one of his poems,
he cautions his mistress that, since they've both been invited to the
same dinner, he’s bound to see her there with her husband. Don’t
let him kiss you on the neck, Ovid tells her, it will drive me crazy,

When the chic, sophisticated Romans conquered the wilds of Britain, 
their cuisine conquered, too. As Pullar has pointed out, the
Anglo-Saxon words ‘“‘cook” and “kitchen” derive from the Latin, so
the Romans no doubt greatly raised the level of sophistication in
both spheres. Medieval tastes were still Roman tastes (sweet and
sour sauces, spicy, currylike dishes). It was the crusaders who devel:
oped a taste for the spices of the East—cinnamon, nutmeg, carda:
mom, mace, cloves, and rose attar—as they had for the perfumes,
silks, dyes, ornate sexual practices, and other delicacies. The poor
Britains lived in squalor and the rich lived in ostentation, holding
magnificent feasts in honor of marriages and other celebrations,
Many people have written that medieval cooks used a heavy han
with spices to mask the odor of their half-decayed meat, but ladling
on the spices was a legacy from the Romans and the crusaders.

Taste = 147

Some of the strangest culinary habits arose in England during the
eighteenth century, when bored city dwellers became fascinated by
sadism, sorcery, and a dungeons-and-skeletons sense of fun. The idea
arose that torturing an animal made its meat healthier and better
tasting and even though Pope, Lamb, and others wrote about the
practice with disgust, people indulged in ghoulish preparations that
turned their kitchens into charnel houses. They chopped up live fish,
which they claimed made the flesh firmer; they tortured bulls before
killing them, because they said the meat would otherwise be unhealthy; 
they tenderized pigs and calves by whipping them to death
with knotted ropes; they hung poultry upside down and slowly bled
hem to death; they skinned living animals. Recipe openers from the
era said such things as: “Take a red cock that is not too old and beat
to death. . . .” This was all sponsored by the peculiar notion that
the taste of animal flesh could be improved if the poor thing were
put through hell first. Dr. William Kitchiner, in The Cook’s Oracle,
 a grotesque recipe, by a cook named Mizald, for preparing and
grating a goose while it is still alive:

Take a goose, or a Duck, or some such lively creature pull off all
her feathers, only the head and neck must be spared: then make
a fire round about her, not too close to her, that the smoke do not
choke her, and that the fire may not burn her too soon; not too
far off, that she may not escape free: within the circle of the fire
let there be set small cups and pots of water, wherein salt and
honey are mingled; and let there be set also chargers full of sodden
Apples, cut into small pieces in the dish. The Goose must be all
larded, and basted over with butter: put then fire about her, but
do not make too much haste, when as you see her begin to roast;
 for by walking about and flying here and there, being cooped in
by the fire that stops her way out the unwearied Goose is kept in;
she will fall to drink the water to quench her thirst, and cool her
heart, and all her body, and the Apple sauce will make her dung
and cleanse and empty her. And when she roasteth, and consumes
inwardly, always wet her head and heart with a wet sponge; and
when you see her giddy with running, and begin to stumble, her
heart wants moisture, and she is roasted enough. Take her up and
set her before your guests and she will cry as you cut off any part
from her and will be almost eaten up before she be dead: it is
mighty pleasant to behold!