
There are entire nations that are
showy by nature, and here Spain is superior. In a
word: ostentation is the very polish of heroical gifts.
It gives them a second nature.

“But this is only true when it is backed up by reality.
Where there is no merit, ostentation is vulgar
deception, and all it does is to make defects more
visible and laughable. Some people can't wait to
show themselves on the universal stage, and once
they get there, they show off only their ignorance,
which had been hidden safely away.

"Nowhere do we have to be more careful of affectation 
than in displaying our gifts, for affectation
borders on vanity, and vanity on scorn. Any show of
talent must be moderate, and, as I was saying, it has
to happen at just the tight moment. Moderation in a
matter like this is even more important than any sort
of physical temperance . I _

“The wise sometimes display their gifts with a kind
of dumb eloquence, as though by accident. And
sometimes you can win applause by hiding your talents. 
The best display can be to hold things back, for
Privation stings the curiosity of others.

“It takes a certain grace to practice this art, and a
certain slyness. It is a great stratagem not to reveal
things all at once, and lay down your cards one by
One, painting perfection with one stroke after 
another, suggesting it little by little, so that one gift
seems to hint at another, greater one and heightens
expectation. And the same is true of deeds, when you
want to bait the admiration of others.

“And now, coming to the matter at hand, I say it
would be violent to concede beauty to the Peacock
and deny him permission to display it. Wise Nature
would never agree to that, for she would be condemning 
her own providence. And no law should
violate nature, except when reason overrules . . ,

“Our remedy is both practical and efficient, and it
is this. The Peacock is hereby commanded, each
time he displays the variety and beauty of his plumage, 
to draw the eyes of others to his dreadfully ugly

. well, feet. I can assure you that this alone will
be enough to correct his vanity.”

All applauded this sentence, the Peacock obeyed,
and court was adjourned, They sent one of the birds
to ask elegant, wise Aesop to add this modern incident 
to his ancient fables.