I was to be the monument of their liberation from the shame of being—
what they were. And that there was shame in this was a
fact that everyone seemed to believe as a matter of course.
Tt was in the gleeful discounting of themselves—what do we
know?—with which our parents greeted every fresh victory in 
our savage competition for “high averages,” for prizes, f
or a few condescending words of official praise from the 
principal at assembly. 

It was in the sickening invocation of “Americanism”—the word 
itself accusing us of everything we apparently were not. 
Our families and teachers seemed tacitly agreed that we 
were somehow to be a little ashamed of what we were. Yet it 
was always hard to say why this should be so. It was certainly not—
in Brownsville!—because we were Jews, or simply because
we spoke another language at home, or were absent on our
holy days. It was rather that a “refined,” “correct,” “nice”
English was required of us at school that we did not naturally speak, 
and that our teachers could never be quite sure
we would keep. This English was peculiarly the ladder of
advancement. Every future young lawyer was known by
it. Even the Communists and Socialists on Pitkin Avenue
spoke it. It was bright and clean and polished. We were 
expected to show it off like a new pair of shoes. When the
teacher sharply called a question out, then your name, you
were expected to leap up, face the class, and eject those
new words fluently off the tongue.

There was my secret ordeal: I could never say anything
except in the most roundabout way; I was a stammerer.
Although I knew all those new words from my private
reading—I read walking in the street, to and from the 
Children’s Library on Stone Avenue; on the fire escape and the
roof; at every meal when they would let me; read even
when I dressed in the morning, propping my book up
against the drawers of the bureau as I pulled on my long
black stockings—I could never seem to get the easiest words
out with the right dispatch, and would often miserably signal 
from my desk that I did not know the answer rather I
than get up to stumble and fall and crash on every word.
If, angry at always being put down as lazy or stupid, I did
get up to speak, the black wooden floor would roll away
under my feet, the teacher would frown at me in amazement, 
and in unbearable loneliness I would hear behind me
the groans and laughter: twh-tub-tub-tuh.

The word was my agony. The word that for others was
so effortless and so neutral, so unburdened, so simple, so
exact, I had first to meditate in advance, to see if I could
make it, like a plumber fitting together odd lengths and
shapes of pipe. I was always preparing words I could speak,
storing them away, choosing between them. And often,
when the word did come from my mouth in its great and
terrible birth, quailing and bleeding as if forced through a
thornbush, I would not be able to look the others in the
facé, and would walk out in the silence, the infinitely 
echoing silence behind my back, to say it all cleanly back to
myself as I walked in the streets. Only when I was alone
in the open air, pacing the roof with pebbles in my mouth,
as I had read Demosthenes had done to cure himself of
stammering; or in the street, where all words seemed to
flow from the length of my stride and the color of the
houses as I remembered the perfect tranquillity of a phrase
in Beethoven’s Romance in F I could sing back to myself

