

Lost in the gray photographs and drawings of men —
going into battle, ruined towns in Serbia, Belgium, and
France where one chimney still rose from a house destroyed 
by shell fire, pictures of the victorious French in
1919 dipping their battle standards in the Rhine. 

Therewere two photographs I remember particularly: it was
really for them that I went back and back to that barbershop. 
One showed a group of German officers in full
uniform, with all their medals, standing outside a brothel
in France with the ladies of the house, who were naked
to the- waist and wore crosses between their enormous
breasts. The officers had their arms comfortably draped
over the girls’ shoulders, and grinned into the camera.
German Kuttur, ran the caption. How THE ENEMY
AMUSES ITSELF BEHIND THE LINES. The other photograph
showed Kaiser Wilhelm with his retinue, inspecting troops.
The Kaiser and the generals were walking on wooden
planks; the caption noted that the planks had been laid
there to keep the distinguished company from walking
in the blood that ran over the field.

The shoemaker is still there; the old laundry is now a
printing shop. Next to it is the twin of our old house,
connected with ours below the intervening stores by a
long common cellar. As I look at the iron grillwork over
the glass door, I think of the dark-faced girl who used to
stand on that stoop night after night watching for her
Italian boy friend. Her widowed mother, dressed always
in black, a fat meek woman with a clubfoot, was so horrified 
by the affair that she went to the neighbors for
help. The quarrels of mother and daughter could be heard
all over the street. “How can you go around with an
Italian? How can you think of it? You're unnatural!
after night she would sit at her window, watching the
girl go off with her Italyéner—ominous word that contained 
all her fear of the Gentiles—and weep. 

The Italian boy was devoted to the daughter and wanted them to
marry. Again and again he tried to persuade the mother,
but she would lock the door on him and cry out from
behind it in Yiddish: “I have harmed you and your family?
I interfere with your customs? Go away and leave us be!
Leave us be! A Jewish girl is not for you, Mister! Go
away!” In desperation, he offered “to become a Jew.”
No one had ever heard of such a thing, and the mother
was so astonished that she gave her consent to the marriage. 
The boy was overjoyed—but waited until the last
possible moment before.the wedding to undergo circumcision, 
and as he walked tremblingly to the canopy, the
blood dripping down his trouser legs, fainted dead away.
The block never stopped talking about it.

Where now is my beautiful Mrs. Baruch, the “chicken
lady,” who sat smack in the middle of her store on a
bloody kitchen chair plucking and plucking the feathers
off her chickens with such a raw hearty laugh that you
could hear her a block away? I would stop in her doorway 
on my way back from school just to watch her work,
for as she plucked, plucked the feathers off her chickens
with one grimly impatient pull along her right elbow, she
seemed instantaneously to draw out of their bellies a great
coiling mass of intestines and blood vessels, and—never