

selection; but who or what selects the favourable variations for 
breeding in the case of undomesticated animals or plants? ‘How selection
could be applied to organisms living in a state of nature remained for
some time a mystery to me.’

The deadlock lasted a year and three months. He tried a number of
hypotheses, but none of them worked. He toyed with the idea of
some universal law, according to which species were born, matured, and
died, just as individuals do. “There is nothing stranger in the death of a
species than in the death of individuals.’ Then he assumed, by a
perverse analogy, that since nothing is preserved of an individual who
dies without leaving offspring, so a. species too will die out unless it
gives rise to another species. But they were wrong guesses, and his
thoughts kept running in circles in the blocked matrix—as Sultan’s did
until his eyes fell on the stick.

In Darwin’s case the stick was Malthus’s An Essay on the Principle of
Population. It had been published in 1797—more than forty years earlier.
When Darwin read the essay—among other books which he read ‘for
amusement’, as he said—he saw in a flash the ‘natural selector’, the
causative agent of evolution, for which he had been searching:

As many more individuals of each species are born than can
possibly survive; and as consequently there is a frequently recurring
struggle for existence, it follows that any being, if it vary ever so
slightly in a manner profitable to itself. . . will have a better chance
of survival, and thus be naturally selected (Darwin’s italics). Thus
favourable variations would tend to be preserved, and unfavourable
ones to be destroyed. Here, then, I had at last got a theory by which
to work.

He had found the third thread. Now the pattern of the theory was
complete: what remained to be done was its elaboration—the weaving
of the huge carpet which took him most of the rest of his life.

The odd thing about the story is—as others have pointed out—that
Darwin had completely misunderstood Malthus. The struggle for
existence, in which Darwin discovered the causative mechanism ol
evolutionary improvement, Malthus himself had regarded as a cause
of misery, frustration, and decline. The increase of population was foi
Malthus an unmitigated evil and an obstacle to progress. The essay hail
actually been written as a polemic against Condorcet and Godwin, whi
had argued the perfectability of the human species. Domestic breeding,
Malthus retorted, could improve animals and plants only to
limited degree; but a carnation could never be made to be that of a
cabbage, and similar limits were set to human progress. Th ‘ He
steele for sani was for Malthus not the whiphand of evohiioll
but a scourge. What Darwin found in Malthus’s essay he had read i 4
te into
: aie sy Kepler had read his brooms and planetary lodestones
Even odder is the fact that Wallace arrived at the same dis
also. by way of Malthus. Alfred Russell Wallace was New eae
gullible, and at the beginning of his career even more of a deena
than the young Darwin. He was fourteen years younger than Darwi ‘
he had been educated at an indifferent grammar school and Iodine
ea in pe ae he ee: up that occupation, he had
in nature, and ‘it took another four year. for hi
advance beyond the recognition of rose and Biilbselisp PORT
— a shilling booklet published by the Society for Eerie
seful Knowledge, the elementary classifications of botany’ .24
At twenty-one he became a schoolteacher of sorts. In eh ear h
read, among other books, Darwin’s Journal of a Naturalist’s Vi :
the Beagle and Malthus’s Essay on Population. But his mind did es
click.