

set of rules for fighting the old battles all over again. To quote G. W.
Brandt: “There is basically only a limited number of plots; they can be
seen, in different guises, recurring down the ages. The reason is in life
itself. Human relationships, whilst infinitely varied in detail, reveal—
stripped down to fundamentals—a number of repetitive patterns.

Writers straining to invent a plot entirely fresh have known this for a_
long time. Goethe quoted Gozzi’s opinion that there were only thirty 
six tragic situations—and he added that Schiller, who believed that
there were more, had not even succeeded in finding as many as that.’?

Integrations and Confrontations

If the individual act of discovery displays essentially the same 
psychological pattern in science and in art, their collective progress differs in
one important respect. We have seen (Chapter X) that the evolution
of science is neither continuous nor cumulative in a strict sense; but it
is nevertheless more so than the evolution of art.

In the discoveries of science, the bisociated matrices merge in a new
synthesis, which in turn merges with others on a higher level of the
hierarchy; it is a process of successive confluences towards unitary,
universal laws (at least, this applies to a given province of science in a
given period or cycle). The progress of art does not display this overall
‘river-delta’ pattern. The matrices with which the artist operates are
chosen for their sensory qualities and emotive potential; his bisociative
act is a juxtaposition of these planes or aspects of experience, not their
fusion in an intellectual synthesis—to which, by their very nature, they
do not lend themselves. This difference is reflected in the quasi-linear
progression of science, compared with the quasi-timeless character of
art, its continual re-statements of basic patterns of experience 
in changing idioms. If the explanations of science are like streams joining rivers,
rivers moving towards the unifying ocean, the explanations of art
may be compared to the tracing back of a ripple in the stream to its
source in a distant mountain-spring.

But I must once more repeat, at the risk of being tedious, that in all
domains of creative activity intellectual and aesthetic experience are
both present in various mixtures; that ‘science’ and ‘art’ form a continuum; 
that changes of fashion are common in the zig-zag course of
science, while on the other hand, development of a given art-form over
a period often shows a distinct ‘river-delta’ pattern.* The modern
atom-physicist knows more than Democritus, but then Joyce’s
Ulysses also knows more than Homer’s Odysseus; and in some respects
this progress in knowledge, too, is of a cumulative order.

Archetypes

Always bearing these qualifications in mind, we might spin out the
metaphor: if the great confluence towards which science strives is the
universal logos, the ultimate spring of aesthetic experience is the
archetypos. The literal meaning of the word is ‘implanted’ (typos=
stamp) ‘from the beginning’. Jung described archetypes as ‘the psychic
residua of numberless experiences of the same type’ encountered by
our ancestors, and stamped into the memory of the race—that is, into
the deep layers of the ‘collective unconscious’ below the level of 
personal memories. Hence, whenever some archetypal motif is sounded,
the response is much stronger than warranted by its face value—the
mind responds like a tuning fork to a pure tone.

One need not be a follower of Jung to recognize the same archetypal 
experiences crystallized into symbols in the mythologies of
cultures widely separate in space and time. Examples of such recurrent
patterns are the death-and-resurrection motif; the extension of the
sexual duality into the metaphysical polarities of masculine logic and
feminine intuition, mother earth and heavenly father, etc.; the strife
between generations—and its counterpoint, the taboo on incest; the
Promethean struggle to wrest power from the gods—and the admission 
that reality is beyond the mind’s grasp, hidden by the veil of Maya, 
reduced to shadows in Plato’s cave. These perennial patterns of victory 
and defeat recur in ever-changing variations throughout the ages, 
because they derive from the very essence of the human condition—
its paradoxes and predicaments. They play an all-important part 
in literature, from Greek tragedy down to the present, permeating both the 
whole and the part: the plot, and the images employed in it. The poetic image
attains its highest vibrational intensity as it were, when it strikes
archetypal chords—when eternity looks through the window of time.

William Empson’ has given a convincing analysis of the archetypal
imagery in Nash’s famous lines—which, however often quoted, never
lose their power: ‘Brightness falls from the air./Queens have died young.