
particular experiences to a universal frame, the temporal to the eternal
—as the scientist relates particular phenomena to general laws and
ultimate causes. In both cases the flash of spontaneous illumination is
followed by emotional catharsis; ‘truth’ and ‘beauty’ appear as
complementary aspects of the indivisible experience. The difference
between the two in objective verifiability is a matter of degrees, and
arises only after the act; the act itself is in both cases a leap into the
dark, where scientist and artist are equally dependent on their fallible
intuitions.

Originality, selective emphasis, and economy are certainly not the
only criteria of literary excellence, but they proved to be a kind of
handy mariner’s compass for the critic at sea; and the ‘law of infolding’
appears to be equally valid—and tantalizing—in science as in art.

CHARACTER AND PLOT

Identification

[ his monologue in Act II, after the First Player’s dramatic recital,
Hamlet asks a pertinent question:
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all the visage wann’d,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in ’s aspéct,
A broken voice...
... and all for nothing,
For Hecuba!
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her?

The answer to Hamlet’s question was given by Flaubert: Emma
ry, C est moi.
sae magic tie is identification. Without it, why indeed should our
tear-glands become active on Hecuba’s behalf? Goethe s early novel,
The Sorrows of Young Werther, unleashed an epidemic of suicide in
Germany; every romantic young man felt that he was Werther.

The extent to which a character in a novel ‘lives’ depends on the
intensity of the reader’s participatory ties with him. To know what
Hamlet feels while listening to the ghost, is the same thing as to know
how it feels to be Hamlet. I must project part of myself into Hamlet,
or Hamlet into myself—‘projection’ and ‘introjection’ are metaphors
referring to the partial breakdown of the crust of personal identity.
This remains true, regardless whether the reader admires, despises,