

the anti-masculine and murderous agitation of the sisters
embodies a true resistance of the feminine nature against
Psyche’s situation and attitude, the beginning of a higher
feminine consciousness. Not that the sisters represent
this consciousness, they are only its shadowy, that is,
negative, precursor. But if Psyche succeeds in attaining
this higher level, it is only because she starts by subordinating 
herself to the negative directive of her sisters. It
is only by breaking the taboo that Eros has seduced
her, by responding to the seduction of her sisters, that
she comes into conflict with Eros, who, as we shall show
is the foundation of her own development. As in the
Biblical episode, the heeding of the serpent leads to expulsion 
from paradise and to a higher consciousness.

For with all its rapture is this existence in the sensual
paradise of Eros not an unworthy existence? Is it not a
state of blind, though impassioned, servitude against
which a feminine self-consciousness—and such is the
matriarchal attitude of the feminine—must protest
against which it must raise all the arguments that 
raised by the sisters? 

Psyche’s existence is a nonexistence a being-in-the-dark, 
a rapture of sexual sensuality who may fittingly be characterized 
as a being devoured by a demon, a monster. Eros as an unseen fascination 
is everything that the oracle of Apollo, cited by the sisters, has
said of him, and Psyche really is his victim.”

Psyche’s existence in the dark paradise of Eros is an interest
ing variant of the hero’s engulfment by the whale-drago
monster. Here the containment and captivity in the darkness are
overlaid by the quality of pleasure, but this situation too i
archetypal and not exceptional. The danger of engulfment i
often disguised by the lure of a (regressive) paradise which,


THE COMMENTARY

The basic law of the matriarchate forbids individual
relations with the man and acknowledges the male only
as an anonymous power, representing the godhead. For
Psyche this anonymity is fulfilled, but at the same time
she has incurred the profound, ineradicable disgrace of
succumbing to this manhood, of falling into its power.
From the standpoint of the matriarchate there is only
one answer to this disgrace: to kill and castrate the masculine, 
and that is what the sisters demand of Psyche.
But they not only embody regression; a higher feminine
principle is also at work, as is made plain by the symbolism 
with which the myth literally “illuminates”
Psyche’s unconscious situation.

In her conflict with Eros, Psyche repeatedly resists his
injunction to break off relations with her sisters; and
with a puzzling persistence that appears to contradict
her seeming softness, she preserves her bond with them
in the face of the most urgent warning. In the course of
this conflict she utters the revealing words that are the
key to her inner situation: “I seek no more to see your
like the gingerbread house in the tale of Hansel and Gretel,
conceals a devouring monster; here the devourer is the dragon
Eros; in the fairy tale it is the witch. As in the night sea
voyage the male solar hero kindles the light in the belly of the
monster and then cuts himself out of the darkness, Psyche too,
in her liberation from the prison of darkness, is equipped with
light and knife. But in the masculine solar myth the hostile, 
killing action of the hero occupies the foreground; even where it
is knowledge, it kills and “dismembers” its object, the dragon.
In its feminine variant this need of knowing remains bound up
with the greater need of loving. Even where the heroine Psyche
is compelled to wound, she preserves her bond with her lover,
whom she never ceases to conciliate and transform.
