

AMOR AND PSYCHE

divine-lower sphere(In this “extreme journey” Psyche in
for the first time herself{ No animal can help her, for on
this journey nothing and no one can substitute for her,

All alone Psyche undertakes this heroic path of rebirth
for the sake of her love, for the sake of Eros, armed
with the tower’s instructions and the desperate yearning
of her heart to find her loved one again in defiance of
all obstacles. It had been the eagle’s task to carry 
something human to celestial heights; Psyche must carry
something hidden beneath the earth up into the world,

The details of the journey to Persephone need not concern us; 
the payment of the coin to Charon and the
throwing of the sops to Cerberus are traditional motifs,
Not specific to the story of Psyche. The same is true of
the conventional behavior of Persephone. The rule against
taking food in the underworld is an archetypal feature
of the journey to Hades (we find a parallel in America,
for example), without specific bearing on Psyche’s journey. 
But it strikes us as a different matter that Psyche
should be forbidden to help the donkey driver, the
corpse, and the weaving women.

Here again we may possibly have traditional motifs,
but they take on a special significance for Psyche. As the
tower teaches Psyche, “pity is not lawful.” If, as we shall
proceed to show, all Psyche’s acts present a rite of initiation, 
this prohibition implies the insistence on “ego stability” 
characteristic of every initiation. Among men this
stability is manifested as endurance of pain, hunger,
thirst, and so forth; but in the feminine sphere it 
characteristically takes the form of resistance to pity. 

This firmness of the strong-willed ego, concentrated on its goal,
is expressed in countless other myths and fairy tales, with
their injunctions not to turn around, not to ANISM and
the like. While ego stability is a very masculine virtue,
it is more; for it is the presupposition of consciousness
and of all conscious activity.

The feminine is threatened in its ego stability by the
danger of distraction through “relatedness,” through
Eros. This is the difficult task that confronts every feminine 
psyche on its way to individuation: it must suspend
the claim of what is close at hand for the sake of a distant
 abstract_goal. Thus the tower is perfectly right in
saying that these dangers are “snares” set by Aphrodite.
The Great Mother, as we recall, also has her life-giving
and life-preserving aspect, but in the conflict between
Aphrodite and Psyche she reveals only the negative side.
This means that here she represents only nature and the
species in opposition to the requirements of the individual,
and from this standpoint the merciful attitude
of the Good Mother can be forbidden to the individual.

The universal component of relatedness is so essential
a part of the collective structure of the feminine psyche
that Briffault regards it as the foundation of all human
community and culture, which he derives from the
feminine group with its bond between mothers and children. 

But this bond is not individual but collective; it
pertains to the Great Mother in her aspect as preserver of
life, as goddess of fertility, who is not concerned with
the individual and individuation, but with the group,
which she bids to “be fruitful and multiply.”
