
rising into the late fairy-tale world of the Alexandrine Aphrodite.

The ancient, primordial motif of the bride dedicated
to death, of “death and the maiden,” is sounded. And
here we discern a central phenomenon of feminine-matriarchal 
psychology.

Seen from the standpoint of the matriarchal world,
every marriage is a rape of Kore, the virginal bloom, by
Hades, the ravishing, earthly aspect of the hostile male,
From this point of view ¢very marriage is an exposure
on the mountain’s summit in mortal loneliness, and a
(waiting for the male monster} to whom the bride is surrendered. 
The veiling of the bride is always the veiling of
the mystery, and marriage as the marriage of death is a
central archetype of the feminine mysteries,

In the profound experience of the feminine, the martriage of doom 
recounted in innumerable myths and tales,
the maiden sacrificed to a monster, dragon, wizard, or
evil spirit, is also a hieros gamos. The character of rape
that the event assumes for womanhood expresses the projection—typical 
of the matriarchal phase—of the hostile
element upon the man. It is inadequate, for example, to
interpret the crime of the Danaides, who—all but one—
murdered their husbands on their wedding night, as the
resistance of womanhood to marriage and the patriarchal 
domination of the male. Unquestionably this interpretation is right, 
but it applies only to the last phase
of a development that reaches much farther back.

The fundamental situation of the feminine, as we have
elsewhere shown, is the primordial relation of identity
between daughter and mother. For this reason the approach
of the male always and in every case means separation. 

Marriage is always a mystery, but also a mystery
of death. For the male—and this is inherent in the essential 
opposition between the masculine and a
feminine—marriage, as the matriarchate recognized, is
primarily an abduction, an acquisition—a rape. a
7 en we concern ourselves with this d mythological and psychological 
stratum, we must forget or natural development and the cultural forms
 taken by the relationship between man and woman and go back to the
primordial phenomenon of the sexual encounter between
them. It is not hard to see that the significance of this encounter is and must be very different for the masculine and the feminine. What for the masculine is ——
victory, rape, and the satisfaction of desire—we need only
take a look at the animal world and have the courage to
recognize this stratum for man as well—is for the feminine destiny,
 transformation, and the profoundest mysf life.
- is no accident that the central symbol of maidenhood is the flower, 
which delights man with its natural
beauty, and it is extremely significant that the consummation of marriage, 
the destruction of virginity, should be known as “deflowering.” 

In his interpretation of Persephone, Kerényi* has pointed to the death of the maiden
Kore and the fluid boundary between being and nonbeing at the gates of Hades. Our aim is to provide psychological clarification of this mythological datum. For
1“The Psychological Aspects of the Kore,” in ss =
Kerényi, Essays on a Science of Mythology. [S