

The center of criticism will always keep criticism an art, 
as long as the critic recognizes that criticism comes out 
of it but cannot be built on it.

Thus, though the normal development of a critic’s taste is toward
greater tolerance and catholicity, still criticism as knowledge is one
thing, and value-judgements informed by taste are another. The
attempt to bring the direct experience of literature into the 
structure of criticism produces the aberrations of the history of taste
already dealt with. The attempt to reverse the procedure and bring
criticism into direct experience will destroy the integrity of both.

Direct experience, even if it is concerned with something already
read hundreds of times, still tries to be a new and fresh experience
each time, which is clearly impossible if the poem itself has been
replaced by a critical view of the poem. To bring my own view
that criticism as knowledge should constantly progress and reject
nothing into direct experience would mean that the latter should
Progress toward a general stupor of satisfaction with everything
written, which is not quite what I have in mind.

Finally, the skill developed from constant practice in the direct
experience of literature is a special skill, like playing the piano,
not the expression of a general attitude to life, like singing in the
shower. The critic has a subjective background of experience formed
by his temperament and by every contact with words he has made,
including newspapers, advertisements, conversations, movies, and
whatever he read at the age of nine, He has a specific skill in 
responding to literature which is no more like this subjective background, 
with all its private memories, associations, and arbitrary
prejudices, than reading a thermometer is like shivering. 

Again, there is no one of critical ability who has not experienced intense
and profound pleasure from something simultaneously with a low
critical valuation of what produced it. There must be several dozen
critical and aesthetic theories based on the assumption that subjective 
pleasure and the specific response to art are, or develop
from, or ultimately become, the same thing. Yet every cultivated
person who is not suffering from advanced paranoia knows that
they are constantly distinct. Or, again, the ideal value may be quite
different from the actual one. A critic may spend a thesis, a book,
or even a life work on something that he candidly admits to be
third-rate, simply because it is connected with something else
that he thinks sufficiently important for his pains. No critical
theory known to me takes any real account of the different systerns
of valuation implied by one of the most common practices of criticism.

Now that we have swept out our interpreter’s parlor in the spirit
of the law, and raised the dust, we shall try it again with whatever
liiguents of revelation we may possess. It should hardly be necessary 
to point out that my polemic has been written in the first
person plural, and is quite as much a confession as a polemic, It is
clear, too, that a book of this kind can only be offered to a reader
who has enough sympathy with its aims to overlook, in the sense
hot of ignoring but of seeing past, whatever strikes him as inadequate or 
simply wrong. I am convinced that if we wait for a
fully qualified critic to tackle the subjects of these essays, we shall
wait a long time. In order to keep the book within the bounds that
would make it possible to write and publish it, I have proceeded
deductively, and been rigorously selective in examples and illustrations,
 The deductiveness does not extend further than tactical
method, and so far as I know there is no principle in the book which
is claimed as a perfect major premise, without exceptions or negative 
instances. Such expressions as “normally,” “usually,” “regularly,” or 
“as a rule” are thickly strewn throughout. An objection
of the. “what about so-and-so?” type may always be made by the
reader without necessarily destroying statements based on collective
observations, and there are many questions of the “where would
you put so-and-so?” type that cannot be answered by the present
writer.

Still, the schematic nature of this book is deliberate, and is a
feature of it that I am unable, after long reflection, to apologize for.
‘There is a place for classification in criticism, as in any other 
discipline which is more important than an elegant accomplishment
of some mandarin caste. The strong emotional repugnance felt
by many critics toward any form of schematization in poetics is
again the result of a failure to distinguish criticism as a body of
knowledge from the direct experience of literature, where every act
is unique, and classification has no place. ‘Whenever schematization
appears in the following pages, no importance is attached to the
schematic form itself, which may be only the result of my own
lack of ingenuity. Much of it, I expect, and in fact hope, may be
mere scaffolding, to be knocked away when the building is in better
shape. The rest of it belongs to the systematic study of the formal
causes of art.