
It is an elementary axiom in criticism that morally the lion lies
down with the lamb. Bunyan and Rochester, Sade and Jane 
The Miller's Tale and The Second Nun's Tale, are all equal
elements of a liberal education, and the only moral criterion
applied to them is that of decorum, Similarly, the morality
taken by the poet in his work derives largely from the structure
of that work, Thus the fact that Le Malade Imaginaire is a comet
is the only reason for making Argan’s wife a hypocrite—she 
be got rid of to make the play end happily, 

The pursuit of beauty is much more dangerous nonsense than
the pursuit of truth or goodness, because it affords a stronger than
tation to the ego. Beauty, like truth and goodness, is a quality this
may in one sense be predicated of all great art, but the deliberate
attempt to beautify can, in itself, only weaken the Creative energy.


When we speak of the human body as “beautiful,” we usually
mean the body of someone in good physical condition between
eighteen and about thirty, and if Degas, for example, shows
pictures of thick-bottomed matrons squatting in hip baths, 
interpret the shock to our propriety as an aesthetic judgement
Whenever the word beauty means loveliness or attractiveness, a
it is bound to do whenever it is made the intention of art, it b
comes reactionary: it tries to restrict either what the artist my
choose for a subject or the method in which he may choose to trail
it, and it marshals all the forces of prudery to keep him from
expanding his vision beyond an arid and insipid pseudo-classicist
Ruskin spoiled many of his finest critical insights with this folly.

Tennyson often hampered the vigor of his poetry by it, and in som
of the lesser beauticians of the same period we can see:
what the neurotic compulsion to beautify everything leads to,
clouds to an exaggerated cult of style, a technique of making 
everything in a work of art, even a drama, sound all alike, and like the
author, and like the author at his most impressive. Here again the
vanity of the ego has replaced the honest pride of the craftsman,

‘The formal or third phase of narrative and meaning, although
it Includes the external relations of literature to events and ideas,
nevertheless brings us back ultimately to the aesthetic view of the
work of art as an object of contemplation, a techne designed for
refinement and pleasure rather than use. This view encourages us
fo separate aesthetic objects from other kinds of artifacts and to
postulate an aesthetic experience different in kind from other
experiences. Corresponding to the bibliographical view of literature
 as the aggregate or pile of all the books and plays and poems
that have been written, we find the aesthetic view of criticism as a
illicrete series of special (sometimes vaguely sacramental) apprehensions. 

There is no reason for not granting this view of literary
experience its own validity; one objects to it only when it excludes
other approaches.

‘The archetypal view of literature shows us literature as a total
form and literary experience as a part of the continuum of life,
in which one of the poet’s functions is to visualize the goals of
human work. As soon as we add this approach to the other three,
literature becomes an ethical instrument, and we pass beyond
Kierkegaard’s “Either/Or” dilemma between aesthetic idolatry
ind ethical freedom, without any temptation to dispose of the
parts in the process. Hence the importance, after accepting the
validity of this view of literature, of rejecting the external goals of
morality, beauty, and truth, The fact that they are external makes
them ultimately idolatrous, and so demonic. But if no social, moral,
or aesthetic standard is in the long run externally determinative of
the value of art, it follows that the archetypal phase, in which art
is part of civilization, cannot be the ultimate one. We need still
another phase where we can pass from civilization, where poetry
is still useful and functional, to culture, where it is disinterested
and liberal, and stands on its own feet.


In tracing the different phases of literary symbolism, we have
been going up a sequence parallel to that of medieval criticism.
We have, it is true, established a different meaning for the word