

Eden before the Fall. In literature this phase presents a pastoral
and Arcadian world, generally a pleasant wooded landscape, full
of glades, shaded valleys, murmuring brooks, the moon, and other
images closely linked with the female or maternal aspect of sexual
imagery. Its heraldic colors are green and gold, traditionally the
colors of vanishing youth: one thinks of Sandburg’s poem Between
Two Worlds. It is often a world of magic or desirable law, and it
tends to center on a youthful hero, still overshadowed by parents,
surrounded by youthful companions. The archetype of erotic innocence 
is less commonly marriage than the kind of “chaste” love
that precedes marriage; the love of brother for sister, or of two boys
for each other. Hence, though in later phases it is often recalled as
a lost happy time or Golden Age, the sense of being close to a moral
taboo is very frequent, as it is of course in the Eden story itself.
Johnson’s Rasselas, Poe's Eleanora, and Blake's Book of Thel introduce 
us to a kind of prison-Paradise or unborn world from which
the central characters long to escape to a lower world, and the same
feeling of malaise and longing fo enter a world of action recurs in
the most exhaustive treatment of the phase in English literature,
Keats's Endymion.

The theme of the sexual barrier in this phase takes many forms:
the serpent of the Eden story recurs in Green Mansions, and a 
bartier of fire separates Amoret in Spenser from her lover Scudamour,
At the end of the Purgatorio the soul reaches again its unfallen
childhood or lost Golden Age, and Dante consequently finds himself 
in the garden of Eden, separated from the young girl Matelda
by the river Lethe. The dividing river recurs in William Morris’s
curious story The Sundering Flood, where an arrow shot over it has
to do for the symbol of sexual contact. In Kubla Khan, which is
closely related both to the Eden story in Paradise Lost and to Rasselas, 
a “sacred river” is closely followed by the distant vision of a
singing damsel. Melville's Pierre opens with a sardonic parody of
this phase, the hero still dominated by his mother but calling her
his sister. A good deal of the imagery of this world may be found in
the sixth book of The Faerie Queene, especially in the stories of
Tristram and Pastorella.

The third phase is the normal quest theme that we have been
discussing, and needs no further comment at this point. The fourth
phase corresponds to the fourth phase of comedy, in which the
happier society is more or less visible throughout the action instead
of emerging only in the last few moments. In romance the central
theme of this phase is that of the maintaining of the integrity of
the innocent world against the assault of experience. It thus often
takes the form of a moral allegory, such as we have in Milton’s
Comus, Bunyan’s Holy War, and many morality plays, including
The Castell of Perseveraunce. The much simpler scheme of the
Canterbury Tales, where the only conflict is to preserve the mood
of holiday and festivity against bickering, seems for some reason to
be less frequent.

The integrated body to be defended may be individual or social,
or both. The individual aspect of it is presented in the allegory of
temperance in the second book of The Faerie Queene, which forms
a natural sequel to the first book, dealing as it does with the more
difficult theme of consolidating heroic innocence in this world after
the first great quest has been completed. Guyon, the knight of temperance, 
has as his main antagonists Acrasia, the mistress of the
Bower of Bliss, and Mammon. These represent “Beauty and
money,” in their aspects as instrumental goods perverted into external 
goals. The temperate mind contains its good within itself,
continence being its prerequisite, hence it belongs to what we have
called the innocent world. The intemperate mind secks its good in
the external object of the world of experience. Both temperance
and intemperance could be called natural, but one belongs to nature
 as an order and the other to nature as a fallen world. Comus’s
temptation of the Lady is based on a similar ambiguity in the meaning 
of nature. A central image in this phase of romance js that of
the beleaguered castle, represented in Spenser by the House of
Alma, which is described in terms of the economy of the human
body.

The social aspect of the same phase is treated in the fifth book
of The Faerie Queene, the legend of justice, where power is the
prerequisite of justice, corresponding to continence in relation to
temperance, Here we meet, in the vision of Isis and Osiris, the
fourth-phase image of the monster tamed and controlled by the
virgin, an image which appears episodically in Book One in connection with Una, 
who tames satyrs and a lion. The Classica] prototype of it is the Gorgon’s 
head on the shield of Athcne. The theme of invincible innocence or virginity 
is associated with similar images in literature from the child leading the 
beasts of prey in Isaiah to Marina in the brothel in Pericles, and it appears in later fictions