

FINDING YOUR WORK

work is so inextricably tied to time and place that we
cannot recapture even our own aesthetic ground of past
times. Try, if you can, to reoccupy your own aesthetic
space of a few years back, or even a few months. There
is no way. You can only plunge ahead, even when that
carries with it the bittersweet realization that you have
already done your very best work.

This heightened self-consciousness was rarely an
issue in earlier times when it seemed self-evident that
the artist (and everyone else, for that matter) had roots
deeply intertwining their culture. Meanings and distinctions
 embodied within artworks were part of the
fabric of everyday life, and the distance from art issues
to all other issues was small. The whole population
counted as audience when artists’ work encompassed
everything from icons for the Church to utensils for
the home. In the Greek amphitheater twenty-two hundred years ago, 
the plays of Euripides’ were performed
as contemporary theatre before an audience of fourteen
thousand. Not so today.

Today art issues have for the most part become solely 
the concern of artists, divorced from —and ignored
by —the larger community. Today artists often back
away from engaging the times and places of their life,
choosing instead the largely intellectual challenge of
engaging the times and places of Art. But it’s an artificial
construct that begins and ends at the gallery door. Apart
from the readership of Artforum, remarkably few people
lose sleep trying to incorporate gender-neutral bio-
morphic deconstructivism into their personal lives. As
Adam Gopnik remarked in The New Yorker, “Postmodernitis, 
above all, post-audience art.”

Under pressure of impending irrelevance, they may begin 
to fill their canvasses and monitors with charged particles 
“appropriated” from other places and times. It is as though art
 itself confers universality upon its subject, as though in art 
all objects automatically retain their power—as though you could
incorporate the power of the Plains Indian medicine
bundle into your work. Or convincingly complete the
closing movements to Schubert’s Unfinished Symphony. 

Today, indeed, you can find urban white artists
— people who could not reliably tell a coyote from a
german shepherd at a hundred feet — casually incorporating 
the figure of Coyote the Trickster into their
work. A premise common to all all such efforts is that
power can be borrowed across space and time. It cannot.
There’s a difference between meaning that is embodied
and meaning that is referenced. As someone once said,
no one should wear a Greek fisherman’s hat except a
Greek fisherman.

CANON

If you’re like most artists we know, you're probably
accustomed to watching your work unfold smoothly
enough for long stretches of time, until one day — for
no immediately apparent reason —it doesn’t. Hitting