

In his attempt to describe the process of individuation,’ 
Jung refers to the above-quoted words of St. Paul
and remarks that “the center of the total personality no
longer coincides with the ego, but with a point midway
between the conscious and the unconscious. This would
be the point of a new equilibrium, a new centering of
the total personality, a virtual center which, on account
of its focal position between conscious and unconscious,
ensures for the personality a new and more solid
foundation.”



 The importance of John for Leonardo, who seems to have
taken a profound interest in this figure throughout his life, 
is reflected by a remarkable and otherwise unintelligible trait 
in another painting: the strange gesture with which the angel in the
incomparably more beautiful Louvre version of The Virgin of
the Rocks points to the worshiping boy John. It is possible that
even then the symbolic contrast between John and Christ, John
representing the earthly and human aspect of human nature,
Christ the immortal and divine aspect, had become meaningful
for Leonardo, Here again we discern Leonardo’s “homoerotic”
problem, which, as the problem of the archetypal “twins,” occurs
over and over again in mythology, e.g., the friendship between
Gilgamesh and Engidu, between Castor and Pollux, etc.



This process is expressed symbolically in Leonardo’s
John, with his smile beyond life and death and his
knowledge of\the waning ego and the waxing selfP?" a
knowledge in Which the pagan and the Christian are
joined in a new synthesis. In the Renaissance as in the
psychology of modern man, nature, condemned by the
Middle Ages, and paganism often appear as symbols of
the “contrary aspect” that requires to be integrated. The
Christianity of Savonarola and the Inquisition could not
but regard Leonardo’s John the Baptist as an “alien
devil,” and it is almost a miracle that Leonardo’s paintings 
survived the religious reaction; but for moderns
they are signs and numinous symbols of a new era in
modern man’s new understanding of himself.

This transcending of good and evil, the Christian and
pagan, the masculine and feminine, in Leonardo did not
escape Nietzsche’s unique psychological insight: “Perhaps 
Leonardo da Vinci alone of those artists had a really
supra-Christian outlook. He knows the East, the ‘land
of dawn,’ within himself as well as without himself.
There is something supra-European and silent in him: a
characteristic of every one who has seen too wide a circle
of things good and bad.” 178

For the experience that took form in Leonardo’s picture, Eros 
and Logos no longer stand in opposition to
each other, but form a higher unity. He perceived in the
world a mystic unity of creative spontaneity and law, of
meaning and necessity. For him love and knowledge
had become one.

From this point of view Leonardo recognized that the
necessity of death is inherent in nature, just as he had
recognized the compensation of nature, who does not
leave her creatures “bereft”:
