
ART AND THE CREATIVE UNCONSCIOUS

eternity of the archetype he represented, he was a hairy
breadth in advance of his own time?

Perhaps I can best explain what I mean by “trans
scendent” if I refer to the works of the great artists’ old
age.

We are accustomed—and this, too, is an acquisition of .
the last Western century, with its emphasis on the indi.
vidual—to take an interest in the biographies of artists,
We approach their lives like the mythological lives of —
prehistoric heroes, except that these Great Individuals are ~
closer to us and we feel more related to their sufferings
and victories, so that, far above us as they may be, they
seem to offer a pledge of the dignity of our own individual
 existence.

It is no idle curiosity that makes us follow the course
of their lives. They serve us as models in the sense that
their work and lives form the unity which we call individuation 
and for which we must strive on the smaller
scale allotted to us.

Each of these artists seems to pass through all the
stages that we have attempted to characterize. He begins 
by responding to a creative impulse within him,
which, as in the stage of the self-expression of the unconscious, 
strives to find form of whatever kind. Then,
maturing, he grows into the contingency of his epoch;
through study, he becomes the heir and son of his cultural tradition.

But whether the artist grows slowly away from the
tradition of his time or Passes over it at one bound and
brings the new element the epoch lacked, ultimately, if
he does not stop at the stage of representation of the
canon—and no truly great artist has ever done
this finds himself alone. He is alone regardless of
Whether he is worshiped as an Olympian, whether he
i) in organist respected in a small circle, or whether he
Lives in deafness, poverty, or madness.

The struggle of these great men with the powers inside 
them and the times outside them seems to result
in a statement which transcends the artistic and symbolic 
reality of their creative life. In music, painting,
sculpture, and poetry they penetrate to the archetypal
transcendence which is the inner life of the world. What
speaks to us from a self-portrait of the aged Rembrandt,
from the end of Faust, Part II, from Shakespeare’s last
plays or Titian’s late paintings, from The Art of Fugue
or a late Beethoven quartet, is a strange transfiguration,
a break-through into the realm of essence. And this transfiguration 
is independent of content, form, matter, or
style, although the transcendence of form would seem
to be one of its elements.

In these works of man a numinous world is manifested in which 
the polarity of outward and’ inward—
nature and art—seems to be resolved. Their secret alchemy 
achieves\/a synthesis of the numinosum at the
heart of nature and psyche.

These aged masters seem to have attained the image
and likeness of a primal creative force, prior to the
world and outside the world, which, though split from
the very beginning into the polarity of nature and psyche, 
is in essence one undivided whole.

In the creative solitude of the Great Old Men the limitations
 of the epoch are passed over; they have escaped


