
and successively with two childless stepmothers. We
know nothing of any meetings with his real mother.
But in any event the family circumstances are very complicated,
 sufficiently so to provide a basis for all sorts of
contradictory psychological constructions.

But even though all the psychological consequences
that Freud drew from a false personalistic approach are
thus annulled, he did not stop here; for in an extremely
penetrating way he made Leonardo’s childhood recollection,
 i.e., an unquestionable document of Leonardo’s
psychic reality, into a broader foundation of his work.
This childhood recollection, the so-called “vulture fantasy,” 
is to be found among Leonardo’s notes on the
flight of birds, particularly vultures. It runs as follows:
“It seems that I was always destined to be so deeply concerned with
 vultures; for I recall as one of my very earliest memories that 
while I was in my cradle a vulture
came down to me, and opened my mouth with its tail,
and struck me many times with its tail against my lips.” ®

It is striking that so critical a man as Leonardo should
have recorded this recollection as something perfectly
self-evident; he did not make the reservation that Freud
unhesitatingly adopts in speaking of the “vulture fantasy.” 
The very fact that Leonardo, despite the critical
“mi parea” (“it seemed to me”), speaks of this event as
an actual childhood memory demonstrates the psychic
reality of his experience. The child—and the smaller he
is, the more intensely so—lives in a prepersonal world,
1.e., a world essentially conditioned by the archetypes, a
world whose unity is not yet, as in a developed consciousness, 
split into an outward physical reality and an
inward psychic reality. Consequently, everything that
happens to his still undeveloped personality has a numinous, 
mythical character, a fateful significance like the
intervention of the divine.® In this sense Leonardo’s
“naive,” unreflecting record shows that his recollection
deals with a fundamental event, a central motif in his
existence, and that if we can understand it we shall have
arrived at a hidden but decisive aspect of his life.

But before we go into the interpretation of this fantasy
and its significance for Leonardo in Freud’s view and
our own, We must say a few words about Freud’s socalled “mistake.” 
It was pointed out recently # that the
bird mentioned by Leonardo, the nibio or nibbio, is not
is Not.

a vulture but a kite. And the question rises: to what extent
 does this destroy the foundations of Freud’s study
and of our own that is partly based on it?

Freud’s “mistake” in taking the bird for a vulture led
him to the mother-significance of the vulture in Egypt,
and the symbolic equation vulture = mother provided

