

And admittedly, there’s always a chance they may
be right — your work may provide clear evidence that
you are different, that you are alone. After all, artists
themselves rarely serve as role models of normalcy. As
Ben Shahn rather wryly commented, “It may be a point
of great pride to have a Van Gogh on the living room
wall, but the prospect of having Van Gogh himself in
the living room would put a great many devoted art
lovers to rout.” Put that way, platitudes about the
virtues of individuality sound distinctly hollow. Just
how unintelligible your art—or you — appear to others
may be something you don’t really want to confront,
at least not all that quickly.

What is sometimes needed is simply an insulating
period, a gap of pure time between the making of your
art, and the time when you share it with outsiders.
Andrew Wyeth pursued his Helga series privately for
years, working at his own pace, away from the spotlight 
of criticism and suggestion that would otherwise
have accompanied the release of each new piece in the
series. Such respites also, perhaps, allow the finished
work time to find its rightful place in the artist’s heart
and mind —in short, a chance to be understood better
by the maker. Then when the time comes for others to
judge the work, their reaction (whatever it may be) is
less threatening.

Conversely, catering to fears of being misunderstood
leaves you dependent upon your audience. In the
simplest yet most deadly scenario, ideas are diluted to
what you imagine your audience can imagine, leading
to work that is condescending, arrogant, or both. Worse
yet, you discard your own highest vision in the process.
In the face of such pressures, it’s heartening to find
contemporary role models even among those who made
it their goal to address the mass audience. 

Charles Eames and Jacob Bronowski consistently placed trust
in the potential of their audience to grow and benefit
from new ideas. Eames once designed a museum exhibit 
that featured a fifteen foot long wall chart (set
in textbook-sized type and equally small pictures)
delineating the entire history of mathematics. When
asked who on earth would possibly read the whole
wall, he calmly replied that each person would 
probably absorb about as much as he/she were able to,
 and just slough off the rest. And, he added, that would 
include some who would make connections between the
data beyond what Eames himself could perceive.

ACCEPTANCE

For the artist, the issue of acceptance begins as one
simple, haunting question: When your work is counted,
will it be counted as art? It’s a basic question, 
with antecedents stretching back to childhood. (Remember those
dreaded playground rituals, when you'd feel badly
enough if you weren’t the first one chosen for the
softball team, but would rather die than not be chosen)
This need for acceptance is the need to have your
work accepted as art, then the accompanying fear is
finding it dismissed as craft, hobby, or decoration.