
Although we see Crane’s method of presenting impressions as they
 impinge on the narrator’s consciousness before being processed,
 another powerful artistic influence is present here: the post-Impressionism 
and protoCubism of Paul Cézanne. Edward F. Fry observes that Cézanne moved
beyond the Renaissance technique of creating the illusion of three-dimensional 
space from a one-point perspective. He undid that illusion by flattening his 
paintings, “integrating surface and depth” by the “running together of planes 
otherwise separated in space” (14). That is what one eye
sees when it looks at a scene.

In this respect, the above Hemingway passage is the equivalent of 
a Cézanne painting. The perceived objects of the tableau are dispersed
across a decentered canvas, and the narrator’s eye directs the reader’s/observer’s 
attention from the scene’s foreground to its depth and back again, covering
the entire visual field. But these planes of space are flattened, so that the
elements of the scene appearing within the frame of the window are rendered in 
the manner of a Cézanne landscape. From the white road to the crow in the tree, 
position markers are either absent or else indicate contiguity (e.g., “aside” 
or “along”) but not levels of depth. The only exception is “beyond,” when 
we move from the trees and road to the field and stream. But in this tableau, 
“beyond” points to height rather than depth. (Compare it with our next Hemingway 
passage, in which depth markers are prominent and restore the illusion of a three-dimensional perspective.)

Fry notes that Cézanne also went “beyond the break with tradition represented 
by the impressionists’ optical realism, to a realism of the psychological process 
of perception itself.” He would “organize his subject according to the separate 
acts of perception he had experienced; houses and other
solid objects were depicted as the artist had conceptualized them after a
long series of perceptions” (14). Hemingway’s narrator’s observations begin —
with his attention to the sun, proceed mostly metonymically through a
number of otherwise unconnected images (each is connected only by its
contiguity with the next image), and conclude with the sun, again under- _
scoring how it cannot be escaped. The sun directs his eye to the half-full
beer bottles it shines upon; the beer is cold in contrast to the sun; he looks
out the open window from where the sun is coming and sees the road; the
road is contiguous with the trees (and they are dusty because of the sun);



eye carries past this sight to the field and stream; 
the stream is contiguous with the other trees and a mill; 
the mill is connected to the log and saw--note that he doesn’t try to explain 
why the saw is rising and falling; his eye catches the four crows in the field; 
his eye picks out another crow in a tree (a second observer); the movement of 
the cook from the porch to the kitchen redirects his attention back inside; 
and the sunlight is still shining through the glasses. Although each observed 
object is the conceptualization of many impressions, Hemingway strips them 
down to one striking visual detail each (as Cézanne did with color and shape), 
thus creating the illusion that each is being perceived for the first time. 
During this passage, he and John finish their beers, but he doesn’t state 
this directly because he can omit the information and still convey it (an example of what
I have termed implication omission), and because it would interfere with
(he seemingly free associative report of the images. (It would show you the
Narrator’s mind actively processing the scene.)

‘This technique, which novelist Russell Banks terms “the logic of the
eye,” has had an incalculable influence on subsequent writers. Banks notes
that Hemingway learned it by “studying Cézanne” but that he himself
learned it “from reading Hemingway”:

Look at “Hills Like White Elephants,” or almost anything. Look at the
physical description, how he moves from background to foreground. It’s
the logic of the eye. It’s not the logic of the paragraph. And it’s not the
logic of exposition. It’s the logic of the eye. The eye moves from distance
to middle ground to foreground. And he will describe a scene in exactly
the same way. Or it moves from foreground to middle distance to background. 
It doesn’t swirl around. Or follow any other logic. It’s a very
physical way of setting a scene.

And that was because the logic of a Cézanne painting is the logic of
an eye. (qtd. in Paul 117)

 Tempest Williams also makes this connection between Hemingway’s
impressionism, “the logic of the eye,” and the influence of Cézanne: “What
I can tell you as a writer of natural history, a storyteller of the American
West, is that Ernest Hemingway has been a powerful mentor, in terms
of what it means to create a landscape impressionistically on the page, to
make it come alive, pulse, breathe, to ‘make the country so you could walk
into it” She, too, concludes, “Hemingway studied Cézanne. We study
Hemingway” (11). In the passage from “An Alpine Idyll,” we move from
