
It is only natural that a young artist try to flag parental
attention by way of accomplishments—positive or negative.
laced with indifference or rage, such youngsters soon learn
that no bone would really meet with parental approval.

Often we are wrongly shamed as creatives. From this sham- particular genius when we stop

jy, we learn that we are wrong to create. Once we learn this
lesson, we forget it instantly. Buried under it doesn’t matter, the
shame lives on, waiting to attach itself to our new efforts. The
very act of attempting to make art creates shame.

This is why many a great student film is never sent off to
festivals where it can be seen; why good novels are destroyed or
live in desk drawers. This is why plays do not get sent out, why
talented actors don’t audition. This is why artists may feel
shame at admitting their dreams. Shame is retriggered in us as
adults because our internal artist is always our creative child.

Because of this, making a piece of art may cause us to feel
shame.

We don’t make art with its eventual criticism foremost in
mind, but criticism that asks a question like “How could
you2” can make an artist feel like a shamed child. A well-meaning 
friend who constructively criticizes a beginning
writer may very well end that writer.

Let me be clear. Not all criticism is shaming. In fact, even
the most severe criticism when it fairly hits the mark is apt to
be greeted by an internal Ah-hah! if it shows the artist a new
and valid path for work. The criticism that damages is that
which disparages, dismisses, ridicules, or condemns. It is frequently 
vicious but vague and difficult to refute. This is the
criticism that damages.

Shamed by such criticism, an artist may become blocked or
stop sending work out into the world. A perfectionist friend,
teacher, or critic—like a perfectionist parent who nitpicks at
missing commas—can dampen the ardor of a young artist
who is just learning to let it rip. Because of this, as artists, we
must learn to be very self-protective.

Does this mean no criticism? No. It means learning where
and when to seek out right criticism. As artists, we must learn
we will discover the nature of our trying to conform to our own or to
other peoples’ models, learn to be ourselves, and allow our natural
channel to open.