

As the infant self shows in awareness and consciousness, it
slowly becomes aware of the intrinsic pain of existence
inherent in Samsara, the mechanism of madness coiled in
the manifest world: it begins to suffer. It is introduced to the first
Noble Truth, a jolting initiation into the world of perception, whose
sole mathematics is the torture-inducing fire of unquenched self 
unquenchable desire. This is not a desire-ridden world that was lacking in
the infant’s previous “wonderful” immersion State, but simply a world
that dominated that State unconsciously, a world which the self now
slowly, painfully, tragically becomes aware of.

And so, as the self grows in awareness, it moves from unconscious Hell
to conscious Hell, and there it May spend its entire life seeking above all
else the numbing consolations that will blunt its raw and ragged feelings, 
blur its etchings of despair. Its life becomes
A map of morphine, and folding itself into the anesthetic glow of all
its compensations, it might even manage to convince itself, at least for
an endearing blush of lavender-and-rose-tinted time, that the dualistic
world is an altogether pretty thing.

But alternatively, the self might continue its growth and 
development into the genuinely spiritual domains: transcending 
the separates elf sense, it uncoils in the very Divine. The union with the Divine—
a union or oneness that had been present but unconscious since the

Thus, the infantile state is not unconscious transpersonal., it js
basically pre-personal. It is not trans-rational, it is pre-rational. It is not
trans-verbal, it is pre-verbal. It is not trans-egoic, it is pre-egoic. And
the course of human development—and evolution at large—is from
subconscious to self-conscious to Superconscious; from prepersonal to
personal to transpersonal; from under-mental to mental to over-mental;
 pre-temporal to temporal to trans-temporal, by any other name:
eternal

The Romantics had simply confused pre with trans, and thus
elevated the pre states to the glory of the trans (just as the reductionists
would dismiss the trans states by claiming they were regression to pre
‘tules), These two confusions—the elevationist and the reductionist—
ire the two main forms of the pre/trans fallacy, which was first outlined
ind identified in the following pages. And the crucial point was that
development is not regression in service of ego, but evolution in transcendence of ego.

And thus ended my Romantic fascination.

* * *

Now, there is indeed a falling away from Godhead, from
Spirit, from the primordial Ground, and this is the truth the Romantics are
(rying to get at, before they slip into their pre/trans fallacies. This falling
away is called involution, the movement whereby all things fall away
from a consciousness of their union with the Divine, and thus imagine
themselves to be separate and isolated monads, alienated and alienating.
And once involution has occurred—and Spirit becomes unconsciously
involved in the lower and lowest forms of its own manifestation—
then evolution can occur: Spirit unfolds (as you will see suggested
in the following pages) from the Big Bang to matter to sensation to
perception to impulse to image to symbol to concept to reason to
psychic to subtle to causal occasions, on the way to its own shocking
self-recognition, Spirit's own self-realization and self-resurrection, And
in each of those stages—from matter to body to mind to soul to spirit—
evolution becomes more and more conscious, more and more aware,
more and more realized, more and more awake—with all the joys and
all the terrors inherently involved in that dialectic of awakening.

At each stage of this process of Spirit’s return to itself, we—you
and I—nonetheless remember, perhaps vaguely, perhaps intensely, that
we were once consciously one with the very Divine itself. It is there, this
memory trace, in the back of our awareness, pulling and pushing us to
realize, to awaken, to remember who and what we always already are.

In fact, all things, we might surmise, intuit to one degree or
another that their very Ground is Spirit itself. All things are driven, urged,

pushed and pulled to manifest this realization. And yet, prior to that:

divine awakening, all things seek Spirit in a way that actually prevents

xiii