

Eros ultimately is the desire to recapture that prior Wholeness which was
obscured when the boundary between self and other was constructed,
But to actually gain a true reunion of subject and object, self and other,
requires the death and dissolution of the exclusively separate self—and
this is precisely what is resisted. Thus Eros cannot find true union, real
Wholeness, but is instead driven to find symbolic substitutes for the lost
Whole, and these substitutes, in order to work, must present as fulfilled
the wish for prior Unity. Eros, then, is the underlying power of seeking,
grasping, wishing, desiring, perpetuating, loving, living, willing, and so
on. And it is never satisfied because it finds only substitutes. Eros is
ontological hunger.

We come, then, to Thanatos. Thanatos—death and the fear of
death. What has been so very difficult for Western psychology to grasp
is that there are at least two major but quite different forms of fear and
anxiety. One form is pathological or neurotic terror: any type of anxiety
that can legitimately be traced to “mental illness,” pathological defense
mechanisms, or neurotic guilt. But the other form of terror is not due to
a mental aberration or neurotic illness but to a perception of the truth—
it is a basic, unavoidable, inescapable terror inherent in the separate
self-sense. Man’s prior Nature is the Whole, but once he splits that
Nature into a separate self vs. an external other, then that separate self —
necessarily is faced with an awareness of death and the terror of death. —
It is existential, given, inherent (as long as the boundary exists between
subject and object)—and the perception of this terror is a perception of
the truth of the situation, not a perception of mental illness.

The Upanishads put this fact beautifully: “Wherever there is
other, there is fear.”191 That has been perfectly obvious to the East for at
least 3000 years. But fortunately, the existential psychologists in the West
have finally—after decades of orthodox psychiatry’s trying to reduce
existential dread to neurotic guilt—exposed and explained this essential
point with such clarity that it can only be overlooked by exposing one’s
ignorance. “The essential, basic arch-anxiety (primal anxiety),” wrote the
great existential psychologist Boss, is “innate to all isolated, individual
Sorms of human existence. In the basic anxiety human existence is afraid
of as well as anxious about its ‘being-in-the-world.’”25 Most of us, of
course, are not directly aware of this primal fear underlying our workaday egos, 
but Zilboorg explains why:

If this fear were as constantly conscious, we should not be able
to function normally. It must be properly repressed to keep
us living with any modicum of comfort... . We may take for
granted that the fear of death is always present in “~ m
functioning. . . . No one is free of the fear of death.

This death terror is inberent in the separate self-sense, the
separate subject, and it arises in one form or another nerve men
is boundary. And once this death pin ae there are ~ only two, things 
that can be done with it. Men and women, i
have two choices in the face of death and Thanatos: they “_ *
and repress it, or they can transcend it in the Ce ‘ ; ‘
long as one holds on to the separate self-sense, one must rep ce
death and its terror. In order to transcend the death terror, one =
transcend the self. That is, there is nothing the separate wed = oe
actually get rid of death terror, since the separate self ‘ at _
terror—they come into existence together and they only eee
together. The only thing the separate nel can ad with fans ony
it, repress it, dilute it, or otherwise hide it. Only in the — crn
All, in actual transcendence, is the death terror uprooted, ue
separate self is uprooted as well. But sneitl that lias a ov
Becker’s phrase—‘consciousness of death is the primary repression,

— The death-terror, the reflex against Thanatos. But where 
precisely is the nature of this Thanatos?  ultimately does it signify:
Perhaps we can give a simple answer in this fashion: : .
We saw that there are radically separate entities seal ere
—that the boundary between subject and object is ultimately moped
Thus that boundary between subject and object, self and other, “
to be constantly and unceasingly recreated moment to meme
for the simple reason that it isn’t real in the first place. At the
time, the simple force of reality, the “pull” of the Whole, acts moment
to moment to tear down that boundary. And as force is Tharnatos.
the individual, moment to moment, recreates his illusory boundaries, so
reality, moment to moment, conspires to aan erie cowne than.
Such is Thanatos, and its real meaning is transcendence.
