
but can, to a certain degree, transcend them. Through members i
cognition, the self can Participate in the higher-order unity of
 sharing a verbal community (comm-unity), a community which far 
transcends the simple and immediate perceptions of the physical
then, proceeds to translate his world and his 
order forms of verbal ideas and membership
representational.

Yet precisely because the verbal self is starting to differentiate
from the body, the body starts to become a special, objective focus 6)
interest—a special home of incest and a special concentration of death

And this, quite simply, is part and parcel of the 
whole psychoanalytic “problem of anality.”

If in terms of the highest symbols; his reality I

I realize that the concept of “anality” j
nowadays—especially with humanistic and transpe
But it is my own feeling that the concept of anali
of the entire spectrum of consciousness—is a pe
expression of real humanistic and even transp
really a problem of life and death and trans
on the body. That psychoanalysis frequently
reductionist fashion is no reason to discard t

its reductionistic use, In my opinion, thinkers
Brown?’ 


k311 have recast this psychoanalytic concept in such a
brilliant fashion that it not only becomes acceptable to humanistic and
transpersonal psychology, it is now indispensable. 
In fact, “anality” is simply a code word for the Atman 
project of this level.

To begin with, allow me to briefly summarize the works of
Ernest Becker on developmental psychology.
choanalytic concepts in existential/bumanistic terms, thus preserving —
and synthesizing the best of psychoanalysis and existential psychology.
Hence, to recast Becker in transpersonal terms is to salvage the best of
all three of these important schools of thought—psychoanalytic, existential/humanistic, and transpersonal/mystic. My own Opinion is that if
each of these three schools can give just a little, we achieve a remarkably
faithful account of what is actually occurring in development on the
whole.

