

If the self can sustain egoic separation anxiety, then it can
differentiate from the ego, transcend it, and integrate it. If not—if the
self remains in love with the substitute gratifications and incests of the
ego—then differentiation halts, growth halts, transcendence halts. Egoic
fusion reigns.

It is very rare, however, given the “level” of present-day society, 
for any individual to evolve past the mature ego stage. Because
the average mode of the self-sense in society at large seems to be
middle, or late egoic, then past that point the force of society as
“pacer of transformation” tends to drop off. Thus, individuals who grow
beyond the egoic stages have to do so either on their own exceptional
talents or through special professional assistance. By the latter, I do not
mean a “doctor for mental illness,” but a guide for self-actualization:
in general, the existential-humanistic therapist (and beyond that, the
early, spiritual Masters).

The job of the humanistic therapist (who, as we saw, tends
to address the centauric realms) is to help the consenting ego begin its
transformation upward to the centaur level itself. And this means that the
centaur-level therapist will start by giving the individual a new way to
translate reality. The therapist will pit his existential translations against
the client’s egoic (or personic) translations until the ego can transform as
centaur. That is, the therapist acts as a pacer of transformation, replacing
the now “fizzled-out” forces of the society and the parents. 

The therapist  strategically frustrates and disrupts the old egoic 
translations and incests, while encouraging and teaching the new and higher centauric
translations. When the client can genuinely and freely adopt the new
centaur translations, then transformation is more or less complete, and
“therapy” is for most purposes over.?

It is not that in this process the individual has simply created,
out of the plastic of his psychic programming, a self-fabricated reality.
True transformation—on any level—is not a form of brainwashing, hypnosis, 
or propaganda. It is rather a form of emergence, of remembrance,
of recollection. The therapist, in translating reality from the centaur
client Gf all goes well, that the client’s higher self, and
the client lives it himself.

(via remembrance) of thelevel, elicits the same level of self in the
is). The therapist engages the language of
lives that language or form to the client unti
‘The therapist simply assists in the emergence
centauric level from the ground-unconscious.

As we earlier explained for all cases, the existential-centauric
mstion by imposing special conditions

therapist assists in this tranfor
~ utiuulleed theese enecial conditions act as symbols of