“run afoul of eachother and [go] at it like savage beasts”:

“What a horrible, wretched sight they were. They scuffled like
little boys, but with the desperation of grown men who have
come to such a pass. They clawed faces, pinched noses, clutched
throats, all the while punching away at one another, grappling,
rolling about on the floor in terribly dead earnest; they spat,
kicked, grabbed, trounced, whacked and frothed at the mouth.
Clerks from the management office came running and with some
difficulty separated the two bitten and scratched opponents.
Drooling and bleeding, his face doltish with rage, Wiedemann
stood there with his hair literally standing on end [...], while Herr
Sonnenschein—with one eye turning black now and a bloody
patch in the curly black hair that wreathed his head—was led
away to the office, where he sat down, hid his face in his hands,
and wept bitterly.”

This prophetic description would seem to argue against Benn’s
assumption that Mann favors a regression to the creaturely; the chapter
on “The Great Petulance” leaves no doubt that, for Mann, such a
regression leads to catastrophe. Benn’s insinuation, however—and —
herein lies its perfidy—raises doubts about The Magic Mountain’s moral
position, which, to call up a favorite concept of Mann’s, appears to be
mere “velleity”, moralizing against one’s better judgment. Gottfried
Benn quotes accurately, namely from Thomas Mann’s 1921 essay on
Goethe and Tolstoy, in which Mann writes:

“The creaturely in us transcends; and all transcendence is
creaturely. The highly irritable sense-equipment of a man who is
nature’s familiar goes beyond the bounds of the actual senses and
issues in the suprasensual, in natural mysticism.””

Lurking behind Benn’s insinuation is the accusation that Mann had
allied himself with the Weimar system and for this paid the price of
having to renounce the level of knowledge he had attained. We may
interpret Benn’s invective as suggesting that Thomas Mann in this way
squandered an opportunity for a fundamental renewal. The Weimar
Republic followed the model of Western, democratic Enlightenment.
For Benn, the looming failure of this “system” in 1932 proves that the
path of the Enlightenment, “brainification”, no longer has a future, so
different way should be taken, by regressing to the “organic level”,
or, to be politically correct, by opting for community, the nation, the
national, by opting for National Socialism, which promised the path to
salvation in a renewal of Germany on the basis of Blut und Boden.

Against the backdrop of Nietzsche’s concept of sublimation, it
becomes clear that the Nietzscheans Benn and Mann react differently to
the philosopher’s genealogy of civilization. Benn reads in Nietzsche—
and then in Thomas Mann—an invitation to wanton regression, while
Mann as a novelist utilizes his knowledge of civilization’s rootedness
in the drives to then develop, in a second step, a concept of sublimation
that encompasses both nature and man in equal measure.

Benn repeats Nietzsche’s mistake of arguing that earlier history
enjoys the privilege of truth compared to later history, thereby forgetting
that the concept of a pre-cultural sphere of Being allegedly based in
the supraindividual is itself a product of culture. Benn’s phantasm of
blissful regression is a by-product of cultural sublimation, or possibly
its shadow, but it is not something that has always existed; or rather,
this is only the case if one assumes a metaphysical perspective, jumping
out of the civilization process like a god and claiming for oneself a
divinatory ability that allows one to transport oneself into the alogical
world of the apeiron. It is precisely this anticipation of joy in regression
that the conservative avant-gardist art Benn demands is to engender.
My reaction to Benn’s insistence on holding Thomas Mann in 1932 to
something he wrote in 1921 is to go back still further in history, namely
to the crisis year 1919. That year, Thomas Mann published an astonishingly 
underrated text that, surprisingly enough, transforms creaturely
transcendence directly into literature according to avant-garde poetics.
In 1919, Thomas Mann brings up one of his dogs from the basement
and takes him for a walk.

The Avant-Garde in Thomas Mann

Thomas Mann is a son of the great century, the nineteenth. His heroes
are Goethe and Tolstoy, Dostoevsky within limits, Nietzsche in the
light of recent history and Oscar Wilde only occasionally. Wanting to
demonstrate Thomas Mann’s avant-gardism thus seems to be from
the start a rather hopeless endeavor. Even if one ought to admit that
this self-reflective author of the fin de siécle clearly fulfills at least one