

Kurt Lewin’s  formula: B = F(B,E), which states that Behavior 
is a function of the person_and_his i Psychoanalysis is the attention

The context is a board meeting in which the most important 
are played by the redoubtable chairman and his treasurer who is
questioned about obscure financial issues. One of the participants in
the meeting, responding to certain clarifications made on the art
the chairman in order to exonerate the treasurer, states: “Now theyre 
are becoming queer.” The speaker is uttering
 The reaction of the other 

 “Now things are he said “clear” rather or, in American slang
exhibits a particular behavior (B) in a particular environment (E), and
this behavior reveals an abnormality (f) whose origins yall
undertakes to elucidate. 5]

becoming clear,”


sémething which he did not want to say but which occurred to him
-as_a thought, however vague and “censored.” This slip of the tongue
allows for the supp behavior is determined b
conflicts between various tendencies in the psyche, which is wh thd
starting point of analysis is the individual. 7“
The Gestalt point of view (2)

7 Such a summary cannot take the place of a thorou

has gh study of Rapaport’s work,
which is to be encouraged here. My overview is concerned primarily with

pages 39-72, “The Structure of the System”.

David Rapaport: The Structure 0 Psychoanalyti
Ibid., pp. 80ff. of Psychoanalytic Theory (note 6), p. 86f.

Self-Control 111

‘ilily; behavior is always “overdetermined.” This proposition is
implemented by the organismic point of view (3): the elements of a
Behavior do not stand in isolation but are intertwined with the entire
personality, for which reason the hermeneutic circle asserts itself within
as an equalizing swing of the pendulum between assessments of the 
whole person and his or her character traits. 

The genetic point of view (4) asserts that a current behavior is determined by an
individual’s personal history, and particularly by the developmental
lines of sexuality. “Complemental series” must thus be reconstructed
In order to illuminate the specific origin of a behavior. According to
the lopographic point of view (5), critical determinants of behavior are
unconscious; a slip of the tongue thus turns out to be evidence of a
conrontation between a conscious behavior in line with reality (a result
al the “secondary process”) and an urge that is subject to the laws of
the archaic “primary process”. 

The dynamic point of view (6) emphasizes that all behavior is ultimately 
determined by the drives, where “drive” is defined as a causal agent, 
inherent to all organisms, whose traces can be found in “representatives” 
(Repriisentanzen) such as the linguistic slip “queer”. Behavior is determined 
by the drives and, at the fume time, by control and defense mechanisms, 
which fail in the case of lapsus linguae. 

The economic point of view (7) complements drive theory:
all behavior involves a discharge of energy (the “pleasure / unpleasure
principle”) and is regulated by mental energy—this is the hydraulic
model of drives. 

The person develops modes of behavior—forms of neutralization, 
of deferral, of repression, of sublimation—that regulate
the mass of drives which unremittingly urge immediate discharge.
The neurotic symptom can be understood as a compromise between
the demands of the drives and their denial on the part of reality,
which admittedly generates suffering. Against this background, the
structural point of view (8) describes the structure of the personality. In
1923, Freud substituted his old topography of conscious-preconsciousunconscious 
with a new structural model: the ego stands between the
id, representing the dimension of the drives, and the superego, the
introjected norms etc. of a particular reality. All behavior is determined
by this structure and is thus characterized throughout by conflicts—
between libidinal and ego drives, drives and censorship, drives and
reality. Behavior is the continuous formation of compromises. The
remark, “Now things are becoming queer,” may be approached both
as a compromise and, at the same time, as the trace of a conflict,
inasmuch as one part of the person acts in such a way that is consistent
with reality, while another part desires to act out a criticism that is
inappropriate to the environment, or possibly a genetically-determined
emotion (ie. determined by personal history): the recurrence of a
triangulation (chairman and treasurer as father and elder brother; the