It is not the primitive but the refined man who has a problem
with sublimation and who is only with difficulty convinced of the —
need to divert his libido. While the “simple” man, with his moderate
demands, is easily satisified by his “day job” and quickly adapts to
the reality principle of the stoic analyst, the intellectual, the “idealist”, —
insists upon realizing the desires of his drives. 

The demand of the drive — evidently increases in proportion to the subject’s 
capacity for ideal —formation. The better he has developed his ability to 
form ideals, the more keenly he is aware that those ideals must be renounced, 
so that in the end the relationships are reversed: the higher the ideal, the greater
the desire for an uninhibited life; the "degree of tension” increases. 

Thus in Freud, too, the vanishing point of this double-edged, latently 
dialectical doctrine of sublimation consists in protest against “reality”
itself, the awareness of a repressivity inherent in the reality principle I
and in the sublimations advanced by it. In the end, this differentiation
generates a recurrence of the archaic, that which belongs to the primary 
process, and in this way the doctrine of sublimation shows itself to be
a preliminary form of the notion of a dialectic of enlightenment. 

As Freud brings neurosis and ideal together, and differentiates them from 
sublimation—ideals potentially lead to neuroticism, neurotics cling I
to ideals—the ideal’s content is cast into twilight. In the context of 
psychoanalysis, the ideal can only mean reconciliation between body
and soul as well as between the individual and society: the healing 
of the wound, the overcoming of Lebensnot. Stoicism, on the other
hand, would mean knowledge of the ideal as well as a simultaneous 
awareness of its illusionary character , yet one must identity 
the ideal as a consequence of repressions, so that sublimation may 
succeed and accordingly leave behind both the ideal and the desire 
that announces itself in what has been repressed. 

One potential way  out of this dilemma is offered by the sharp distinction that Freud
draws in On Narcissism between the formation of ego ideals and the sublimation 
of the drives, which are “often confused”with each other “to the detriment of 
our understanding of the facts”,though their relationship is effectively one of scale. 

When Freud notes that “[a] man who has exchanged his narcissism for homage to a
high ego ideal has not necessarily on that account succeeded in 
sublimating his libidinal instincts,” he is announcing a distinction whose
full relevance is discernable only in the context of group psychology.
Freud’s argument is complemented by his explicit distinction between
a dubious ideal emanating from a deferred narcissism and an authentic
ideal representing the result of sublimations that then, paradoxically,
leave every ideal behind.

According to this theory of narcissism, the subject is able to maintain
_ successfully his all too quickly frustrated narcissism either by deferring
eit to.an ego ideal or by projecting it onto an object that is then courted as
an ideal. In his essay on Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, Freud
applies this mechanism to the formation of groups, thereby explaining
their emergence: “A primary group of this kind is a number of individuals who
have put one and the same object in the place of their ego ideal and have
 consequently identified themselves with one another in their ego.” 
In contrast to this primary group formation, Freud conceives of a culture’s 
great old institutions as the result not of a narcissism that has been acted 
out through identification and idealization, but of sublimations. 
This becomes particularly clear when, in the postscript to his treatise 
on group psychology, he distinguishes between traditional and modern 
forms of social ties. While archaic forms of socialization founded in 
religion “offered those who were bound by them the most powerful 
protection against the danger of neurosis”, Freud writes of modern social ties:

“Nor is it hard to discern that all the ties that bind people to
mystico-religious or philosophico-religious sects and communities are 
expressions of crooked cures of all kinds of neuroses.
impulsions and those which are inhibited in their aims.”

According to Freud, traditional forms of social ties are gone forever,
as history has made evident; the crooked cure of narcissistic idealism,
as the product of repressions, is constantly subject to the danger of
regression. With this astute remark, Freud has explained en passant
the sudden, notorious shift in cultural history, and particularly in the
history of literature, from neurotic isolation to enthusiastic identification a
with mass movements. The ideal that, unlike its narcissistic counterpart, “~° <
would not be neurotic thus turns out to be the ideal of utter soberness,
the Nietzschean pathos of distance possessed by great individuals.

For their part, however, the social feelings of the stoic, distant man
likewise have their origins in perversity. They are to be regarded “as a
sublimation of homosexual attitudes towards objects”, into which they

