

Digital Selective Calling Radios

Digital Selective Calling (DSC) is a VHF radio technology 
that provides recreational boaters with two
unique features that will be discussed below. 
To be fully functional three items must be available:

* A DSC radio
= A Maritime Mobile Service Identity (MMSI) number
* A compatible GPS or Loran unit

The MMSI is a unique nine (9) digit number that is assigned to a DSC 
radio station. If the boater has 4 valid Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) station license or plans to operate in international
waters they need to contact the FCC to get an MMSI. Otherwise, 
they can register with BoatU.S. or SEA
TOW Services by obtaining an MMSI Assignment form. 
Forms are available on the BoatU.S. website
www.BoatUS.com/mmsi or by calling 1-800-563-1536 
and the SEA TOW Services website --.

Some important points to consider are:

» Each vessel you own needs to have a discrete MMSI to be properly identified.
The boater needs to keep their MMS! Assignment data current.
Depending on the make and model of the DSC radio, it may limit 
the number of times you can try % program your MMSsI number into the radio. 
Typically the radios offer you two (2) chances before loc
ing out future attempts, forcing you to send the radio back to the manufacturer.

DSC technology makes a VHF radio function more like a telephone. It allows boaters to send a digital ca"
directly to another DSC-equipped vessel or shore station.

* In an emergency, one push of a button and the DSC radio will send an automated digital distress ales
consisting of your identification (MMSI), and position (if the radio is connected to a GPS or loran or
to other DSC-equipped vessels and rescue facilities.

* You can privately hail another DSC-equipped vessel, or shore station, if you know their MMSI. It is similar
to having a VHF phone number that “rings” the radio called and then automatically switches you 103
predetermined working channel.

Rescue 21 is the Coast Guard system that will provide the Mayday response capability described abe 8
For more details on the Rescue 21 System and its availability in your area visit www.uscg.mil/rescue2?

The Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) is the international system governing saree
radio equipment on commercial ships. For more information on GMDSS visit www.NAVCEN.USCG. gow