

 Any especially dirty batch of fuel should be completely
discarded—it’s not worth risking the engine
for the sake of a tankful of fuel. (On our own
boats, and all others with which I am involved
in the design process, I always include a fuel 
sampling pump that is permanently plumbed
to the lowest point in the main fuel tank—
Figure 9-7C. This allows me to withdraw a
fuel sample at any time and pump it into a
see-through container, such as an old plastic
milk jug or jam jar; all I need is I cup of fuel,
and serious contamination is immediately
apparent. This inexpensive measure will do

‘I more to protect your fuel system than anything
else you can do. We have twice found contamination 
that we were able to remove before
it did any damage.)

e When leaving the boat unused for long periods 
(e.g., when it is laid up over the winter),
fill the fuel tank to the top. This eliminates
the air space and cuts down on condensation
in the tank. Also add a biocide. When returning 
the boat to service and before you crank
the engine, pump a fuel sample from the base
of the tank to remove any condensates.

¢ Periodically flush the fuel tank(s) to remove
accumulated sediment.

-Fuel filters. Most people regard fuel filters as
the first line of defense against contaminated
fuel. As should be clear by now, I regard them as
the last line of defense, whose function is to deal
with any minor contamination that escapes the
preventive measures designed to keep the fuel
tank clean.

DIESEL ENGINES

 Without exception, every marine diesel engine
 should have both a primary and a secondary fuel
 filter. All engines come from the manufacturer
with an engine-mounted secondary filter located
somewhere just before the fuel injection pump
If this is the only filter, a primary filter MUST be
installed (Figures 9-8A and 9-8B). It needs to be
mounted between the fuel tank and the lif
pump, not after the lift pump, because any water
in the fuel supply that passes through a lift pumr
gets broken up into small droplets that are harc
to filter out.

Primary and secondary filters do not have the
same function. A primary filter is the mair
defense against water and larger particles in the
fuel supply, but it does not guard against micro
scopic particles of dirt and water. These are fil
tered out by the secondary filter.

A primary filter needs to be a sedimenter typ
that is specifically designed to separate wate
from fuel. Sedimenters are extremely simple
generally consisting of little more than a bow
and deflector plate. The incoming fuel hits the
deflector plate, then flows around and under it t
the filter outlet. Water droplets and large parti
cles of dirt settle out. The better-quality filter
then pass the fuel through a relatively coarse fil
ter element (10 to 30 microns).

A primary filter should have a see-throug]
bowl with a drain plug or valve so that water cai
be rapidly detected and removed. 