

This is a particularly solipsistic and Puritan 
solution to the problem of inner and
outer worlds.

Following this model, one can understand why, when
Don Quixote is dying and has regained his lucidity, 
Sancho Panza wants him to be his old self again: heroic and
mad and epical. Living by himself, Sancho is going to be
stuck with a paunch and a world of mute things. So much
the worse for him, but he 4as survived, in the way that 
laboratory science has survived its unruly spirit-obsessed parent, 
alchemy, and for some of the same reasons. Marxism
survives Hegelianism until something turns up to displace
dialectical materialism. Everyone remembers Sancho Panza’s 
tears at the deathbed of Don Quixote. Materialism
without ideals, mad or not, weeps. Deprived of a quest, it is
consigned to centuries of weeping.

People in a traumatized state tend to love their furniture.
Théy become ferociously attached to knickknacks. Laura
and her love for her glass menagerie in Tennessee Williams’s 
play will have to stand for a whole platoon of the
dispossessed for whom objects have come alive. To write
about such spiritual conditions, an author might do better
o describe the furniture as a character sees it than to describe 
the consciousness of the person entering the room.
How a person sees the things that surround him usually
tells us more than an explicit description of his mood. \T he
things carry the feeling. They do not when our emotions
are placid, but when our emotions are violent, they must.

In an age of violent emotions, objects become as 
expressive as the people who live among them. They take on
a weird, uncanny life, the life of a fetish. I think of Daisy
Buchanan here, getting into a weepy state over Gatsby's
shirts. Objects in that book reward the careless hysteria
with which they're treated by gazing back, smoldering in
waste piles, and then running down innocent bystanders.
There is a subtle anthropomorphism on almost every page
of The Great Gatsby, as befits a novel about idolatry and
consumerism. But Anglo-American fiction, unlike poetry,
has been slow to arrive at the sort of interplay between
things and people that Fitzgerald’s novel claims as its subject. 

It wants to contain objects and material but to give all
the feelings to the human characters. Objects in Gatsby are
invested with tremendous feeling, and it’s sometimes hard
to tell what the source of that feeling is. The curtains and
the ashtrays and the billboards in this novel sometimes
seem more alive than the characters surrounding them
(also true of the French nouveau roman, the so-called new novel).

My intention in the remainder of this essay is to single
out certain passages of fiction where objects rather than
people (or objects in conjunction with people) are expressive 
or even sentient, and thus become characters. In this
way, objects become subjects. These examples risk the appearance 
of whimsy and lunacy, as I’ve said, but only because they’re written 
in prose. According to the terms of the divorce, sentient objects can 
appear in poetry such as Rilke’s, but not in fiction. The blunt materialistic 
common sense of fiction is supposed to resist this reconciliation. 
But it doesn’t, anymore, if it ever did.

