

In graduate and adult classes, I have never found a group willing
to talk about this story. They have nothing to say about
what happens in it, or else they simply refuse, out of some
combination of good sense, shyness, and gloom, to discuss
it. Collective clamming-up is the rule, not the exception.
“The Little Girl” defeats reasoned discourse, puts a limit
on speech, renders the observer as silent or as stuttering as
Billy Budd. The story stands in every respect against
whatever the reader or even the characters in the story
might wish. No evil is desired, it seems, by Charlie or
Carter or Angie or even the girl, but it’s a precipitate of
their actions. It erupts in the meeting of half-innocent
curiosity, racism, sex, and poverty. Its visible causes are
both adequate and insufficient.

The story is a mulling, a monologue, as many of Paley’s
stories are. Charlie’s monologue is a forcing-into-fiction of
what would rather be an unformulated nightmare. What's
happened is so horrible that Charlie can’t stop imagining it,
probably can’t stop talking about, but there is no place for
the imagination here, or any role for it to play. Charlie is
forced to circle around and around the scene of action in
order to find either an explanation or something for the
mind to do, a place for it to be. Carter cannot have thrown the
little girl out of the window. Maybe she threw herself out. But both
possibilities are almost equally unbearable, except that in
Charlie’s version of the events, the second case, the little
girl “made up some power somehow.”

Out of the telling of the story, the victim makes up some
power. That seems the only possible addition to the narrated
events that acts to counter the relentless movement
toward calamity, the brute facts of pain and violent death.
Against these horrors stands the smallest courage. This
story (despite what the father says in “Conversation with
My Father”) does manage to look tragedy in the face. If
the word “tragedy” sounds a bit high-minded for 
“The Little Girl,” the events nevertheless justify its 
common associations. The social and personal trauma that Charlie 
imagines and, in remembering and speaking, reenacts, is the
singularity that calls forth the repetitive telling of a traumatic event. 
This is what both Freud and Walter Benjamin
have noticed about trauma. The activity of telling the story
serves to air rather than to erase the wound.
Unlike most of Paley’s other stories, “The Little Girl”
has no charm or breeziness. Its actions occur as if on a
chain or inside a cage. The customary voice of the Paleynarrator 
is absent from it, vacated. Charlie is enacting a
monologue in which the dead girl, now forever torn and
damaged, speaks. We are in the place of the dead, in Hell.
That place is where the reader is moved to, in this eightpage story: 
into the last living setting of the hapless
unnamed dead girl brought to fictional life in Charlie’s
compulsive telling. The Paley narrator is not speaking 
anywhere in this story but is almost audibly listening.

The story does not give up on politics. Its events do not
argue for futility or guarantee betterment. Maybe they are
a precondition for politics. Certainly they call forth the
 ancient emotions of pity and terror. All the same, to look this
situation “in the face,” as the doctor-father says, calls forth
a form of horror that is, to use an adjective from “Heart of
Darkness,” inscrutable.