

—Like ... as though I were reading a novel, yes. And then, reading it, but the
hero fails to appear, fails to be working out some plan of comedy or, disaster?
All the materials are there, yes. The sounds, the images, telephones and 
telephone numbers? The ships and subways, the...the...

—The half-known people, Valentine interrupted easily,—who miss the subways 
and lose each other’s telephone numbers? Cavorting about dressed 
in the absurd costumes of the author’s chaotic imagination, 
talking about each other...

—Yes, while I wait. I wait. Where is he? Listen, he’s there all the time. None
of them moves, but it reflects him, none of them... reacts, but to react with
him, none of them hates but to hate with him, to hate him, and loving...
none of them loves, but, loving. .. . (263)

Now, not only does Wyatt occupy the place of the “hero” in The Recggnitions, 
but he also fails to appear, both in the sense that he drops out
of sight for most of the other characters and fails to fulfill the expectations
which have been set up through his identification with a number of
figures in Western myth and cultural history. But though he doesn’t
successfully fill the roles of a modern Faust, heroic artist, martyred saint,
or nomadic quester en route to personal salvation, he does make it
Wyatt thus possesses a complex, double role in the novel, since he
functions both as a character in his own right and as a symbolic agent
unifying the narrative. Yet his double role is no simple allegorical device.
For the latter could hardly account for the peculiarity that, as a character,
Wyatt is at once excessive and lacking: as the protagonist of the central
narrative, he presents a surplus of signifiers, as the number of roles or
positions he occupies in various indicates, but_on the level of the
e signified, he i “missing from his place,” as Lacan says of a
symbolic object, and his absence becomes more significant than his presence.” At the same time, all the significant characters are defined in
relation to him, or echo _him in some way. In this, Wyatt functions as
what in French structuralist theory is called the case vide or “empty slot”
—a symbolic object that traverses a field and in so doing manifests or
precipitates a structure formed as elements in the field crystallize into
positions defined by their relations to the object.

As an excessive signifier, Wyatt elicits—indeed, defines—desire, but it
is a desire he cannot or will not fulfill, for he has always moved elsewhere.
In various ways, he kindles and then refuses to fulfill the desires of Aunt
possible for these patterns to appear in outline. In this, he functions as
fuses co fulfil the desires of Aunt gg
May, the Reverend Gwyon, Esther, Otto, Brown, Valentine, Esme, Sin- 4;
a kind of tracer, cutting a line that traverses the multifarious activities of 
Sinisterra, and Ludy. In fact, we can trace the novel’s plot in terms of this : 
Xin, MB the other characters, and also mirroring their own emptiness and lack 
of movement of desire, as Wyatt assumes different positions and then refuses 
significance. Gaddis himself, in “Notes” from which he allowed Peter or fails 
to fulfill the corresponding role, whether as Protestant minister, 
Koenig to quote, stresses the psychological dimension of this aspect of 
initiate son, husband, artist, counterfeiter, co-conspirator, lover, penitent, 
the novel. Since Wyatt embodies the “spirit” the other characters have
lost, his loss of name symbolizes the loss of that part of themselves that
“would enable them to act more heroically, or at least more authentically.
Gaddis further explains:

There are troubles with pronouns, especially “he,” in those scenes which, when
at all extended, the no-hero—that is Wyatt, becomes lost or confused. To a
strong degree this should be so, as, with Valentine (and all the others, but
pointedly Basil Valentine) he, the no-hero or not-yet-hero, is what the other
person might be: in Valentine’s case, the self-who-can-do-more, the creative
self if it had not been killed by the other, in Valentine’s case, Reason, in
Brown’s case, material gain; in Otto’s case, vanity and ambition; in Stanley’s
case, the Church; in Anselm’s case, religion, &c. &c.”

For all of the important characters, in fact—we ‘could also add Gwyon,
Esther, Esme, Sinisterra, and Ludy to those Gaddis cities—Wyatt is both
the “self who could do more” and the signifier of that lost self.
or madman. In every case, [Wyatt opts out pr fades away, a refusal or
“absence” that is presented in its schematic essentials in his last encounter
with Ludy, where the exchange echoes all the previous encounters, and
Wyatt’s final words recapitulate the pattern:

—You and I... [Ludy says]
—No, there’s no more you and I, Stephen [Wyatt] said withdrawing uphill
slowly, empty-handed. (900)

From the evidence of the narrative alone, it is difficult to say whether
Wyatt is here refusing a gesture of beseeching complicity, and hence a
kind of relationship, or simply refusing an identity of any sort (just as
the phrase “empty-handed” may be read in either of two ways: he has
released the bird, symbolically disburdened himself of his mother’s spirit,
and thereby found release himself, or he has reached a state of final
impoverishment and dispossession). On close inspection, Wyatt’s various