The Becoming-Simulacrum of the Novel

Fantasia of the Library,” Michel Foucault has commented on the book’s
capacity as an object to create a system of references that feeds off of
while also revivifying a domain of knowledge shaped not by rhetorical
or pragmatic concerns but by the library as space and institution. 

Foucault emphasizes that this domain is less an enclosure or fictional alternative
to the depiction of external reality than the creation of a “new imaginative
space.” Hence, the “imaginary is not formed in opposition to reality as
its denial or compensation; it grows among signs, from book to book,
in the interstice of repetitions and commentaries; it is born and takes
shape in the interval between books.” More important, this “interval”
created through citation, allusion, and textual reference is in no way
neutral or inert, for the imaginative space opened up by the kind of
erudition Foucault describes is a scholars phantasmagoria, teeming with


Flaubert’s Saint Anthony, where the lights of scholarly knowledge
reverse into the sandstorms of hallucination, where intellectual rigor and
precision give way to the fantastic, and the book disappears into the
maw of monstrous spectacles that only books at that time could generate.
In La Tentation, for example, the whole world of pre-Christian gods and
religion is swallowed up only to reappear as hallucinated figures of horror
and desire.

In The Recognitions, many of the main characters—the Reverend
Gwyon, Wyatt, Anselm, and even Stanley—are subject to this intellectual
delirium in which the border between knowledge and hallucination gives
way. Perhaps the most vivid short example, however, is encapsulated in
the fate of Mr. Farisy, who shares a room with the Reverend at the
Happymount asylum. Before his breakdown, Farisy had been appointed
by the Congregation of the Sacred Rites at the Vatican to investigate
early methods of crucifixion:

As a scientist, Mr. Farisy had always relied on empirical methods, and found
“no reason to abandon them now: twenty arms were delivered to his laboratory.
He nailed each right hand, and each left wrist, to the wall, and attached mobile
weights driven by a system of bellows which he’d removed from a player
piano, to simulate the rising and falling motions of the breathing human being.
Then he set the thing in motion: weights rose and fell; wood creaked; flesh
tore; bones split; and something snapped in Mr. Farisy’s head. (713)

Farisy now dreams of a crucifixion on a mountaintop, but the victim’s
flesh gives way as Farisy tries over and over again to raise him higher, in
a grotesque travesty of transcendence. We last see Farisy, who has secretly
a hammer and nails under his mattress, trying to convince the Reverend
to allow himself to be crucified to the door of their room.
One may well wonder about the relation between Farisy’s macabre
phantasy and the unit of knowledge. 

His “machine” for producing knowledge is based on scientific principle, 
yet the result is not a credible scientific experiment but a horrifying simulacrum. 
Scientific method, mechanical relationships, the human body and its simulation,
as well as a penal practice symbolically important for Christianity, have
all been connected together in such a way so as to produce something,
having no relationship to any of these. Furthermore, the Passage resonates
with a whole series of missing or ineffectual arms mentioned throughout
the novel: the arm missing from Ignatius of Loyola’s reliquary, the statue ;
of Saint John the Baptist in Brown’s collection that has lost an arm, the
fake arm hanging in Frank Sinisterra’s closet, and of course, Otto’s 
counterfeit wounded arm. And there is another dimension to this unlikely
event, for Koenig reports that the experiment was actually performed,
and then featured on a television program called “In Search Of.” (The
“conclusion” of the experiment was that nails were indeed driven through
the wrists in Roman crucifixions.)

The example is also typical in that knowledge and the quest for truth
and authenticity in The Recognitions are often subverted by madness,
hallucination and delirium, most vividly in the depictions of Gwyon,
Wyatt, and Anselm, but in local examples everywhere. For both Plato
and Deleuze, the proliferation of simulacra is intimately related to the
process of “going mad” (devenir fou), and in Wyatt’s and the Reverend’s
deliria, which hyperbolically jumble and consume the past, we see this
effect actualized at the level of a character’s experience. By violently
recyclying a heterogeneous mix of Western religion, mythology, and art,
their rambling and abstruse speeches dislocate and decontextualize parts
of the literary and cultural tradition into textual “vortices.” Moreover,
the cultural fragments, citations, and references that make up these highly
wrought dispersions constitute especially visible points of impurity and
heterogeneity in the novel’s discourse, since they can only be partially
“integrated” through the psychological associations of the characters or
through the analogies these allusions imply. At the same time, elements
from these textual clusters form into heterogeneous series and chains of
signifiers that traverse the text “at an angle,” producing textual crossover
and “resonance” effects.