 Masquerades and Dispersions

for Wyatt’s tendency is to deflect an appeal voiced from the “you” position
by returning it transformed into a demand voiced as a “they.” On the
verbal level, at least, this is the way he rigorously maintains his separation
from others. Yet Wyatt is the character whose consciousness is most
permeated by the voices of others, both in the sense that his speech is
traversed by cultural quotations and allusions, and in that he is constantly
giving voice to the wants and desires of the other characters. 

At the same time, his speech pattern, marked by its fragmentary and halting 
rhythms, is the most distinctive of all the characters in the novel. 
In his reported speech, then, we find a contradiction implicit in the 
novel as a whole: on the one hand, he urges “separation” and all the values 
it sustains, but in his actual words (that is, at the level of the signifier), 
there is very little separation and the contours or boundaries of his speech 
are often blurred.”

In Chapter V, we discover that Wyatt/Stephen has apparently taken
Sinisterra’s advice that he should retire to a monastery for awhile, though
it is difficult to ascertain whether Sinisterra feels that Stephen is spiritually
troubled or just insane. Stephen’s mental state will also be a mystery to
Ludy, the “distinguished” (for which, read “popular”) novelist from
whose point of view Chapter V is rendered. Ludy has come to the
monastery at San Zwingli in search of a religious experience, preferably
one that he will be able to transmit in a “delicately elevated” prose (but
which turns out to be, as samples indicate, unctuous and cliché-ridden).

Given this point of view, not surprisingly the entire chapter satirizes the
decay of Christianity, perhaps most bitingly when a group of tourists
visiting the monastery for lunch reveal a complete ignorance of the 
fundamental tenets of Catholicism.

The chapter’s central incident involves Ludy’s two encounters withStephen, 
who is staying at the Monastery as a penitent. In the first, Ludy
happens upon Stephen at work “restoring” several of the paintings that
belong to the monastery. It is not clear in what sense Stephen is 
“restoring” the paintings, since he is actually erasing parts of the composition, 
as Ludy discovers. Wyatt’s speech is even more broken and
fragmentary than usual, although in the accumulated context of the book
as a whole, much of what he says is recognizable.* Ludy’s smug attempt
to interpose himself is futile, but like many of the characters, he is held
rapt by Stephen’s strange intensity, even when the latter begins to mutter
and talk to various people who are not present. Stephen claims to have
passed all the scientific tests, and like the master whose painting he is
working on, to have studied with Titian. After explaining that it was
“Separateness, that’s what went wrong” (874) he passes into a long verbal
delirium in which he describes all the scientific tests to which a painting
could be submitted: X-ray and microscopic examinations, pigment analysis, 
detraction tests, and so on. 

The speech is a harangue against scientific attempts to explain art 
but presented as a mosaic of jumbled references to various aspects of 
his identity as a character, most of which are rather
abstruse. At one point, he casually asks if Ludy remembers the passage
in the Paradoxa where Cicero describes the sculptor Praxiteles creating I
a figure by merely removing the excess marble “until he reaches the real
form which was there all the time” (875). Ludy, of course, doesn’t
remember, in fact, he hasn’t read any of the books Stephen mentions.
But then, Ludy suddenly sees an old man standing there, the porter,
who appears “as though he had emerged from the stone” (875). It is
difficult to tell whether the joke is Stephen’s or the narrator’s; in any
case, as Stephen explains, the old man is a fellow penitent (and the rapist
of the little girl to be canonized, we soon realize). All the while, Stephen
has been munching on some slightly discolored and crumbly bread,
which, we discover in a few pages, was unwittingly baked from the ashes
of Reverend Gwyon. And so, Stephen becomes “consubstantial” with
his father. .

In thus weaving together several plot strands and thematic connections
in this preposterous manner, Gaddis surely intends an elaborate joke,
but one that doesn’t deny more serious possibilities, particularly in 
relation to black humor and the grotesque.* Another exchange has a similar
effect. In response to Ludy’s query about the murder that Stephen supposedly 
committed, Stephen gives a totally unexpected account of an
episode in Algeria in which he shoots and kills a legionnaire. 

It’s a compact and exotic tale about an old friend named Han from his student
days (Herr Koppel is also mentioned). When Han, who feels that Stephen
has betrayed him (“There was something missing,” he says), attacks
Stephen, the latter is forced to shoot him. Despite its Hollywood flavor,
the tale sounds convincing. Yet at the conclusion of the telling, Stephen
reveals inexplicably that when they took down the legionnaire’s pants,
they discovered that he had a face tattooed on his “fundament.” That
the tale concludes with this quintessentially carnivalesque image neither
helps to establish nor contravert its authenticity. What it does, rather, is