

They alike may indeed constitute only items in a series for which there is
original or true model.

On the most general level, Gaddis’s novel is a modern retelling of the
Clementine Recognitions, in a manner similar to James Joyce’s treatment of
Homer’s Odyssey in Ulysses. Significantly, the Clementine Rigas
been the object of some controversy concerning its date of com sitio
authorship, and textual authenticity and was often erroneously credited
to Clement of Rome. (It is now generally thought to have been written
anonymously early in the third century A.D.) The status of this “source”
text 1s ambiguous in other aspects as well. For one, the author seems
scenes and the figure of Simon Magus, scholars generally regard the

Clementine Recognitions as a precursor or first version of the Faust legend.*
of Clement’s quest, Gaddis’s The Recognitions also repeats the Faust story
albeit in a truncated form. But like Clement’s quest, the Faust legend
only surfaces intermittently —enough to give the narrative a multileveled
later be examined in some detail, but here I should stress two salient
consequences of their “repetition”: first, the sense in which The 
Reconnitions thereby becomes a palimpsest written over and “in between”.
narrative fragments taken from earlier moments in Western cultural history, 
while at the same time unlayering or de-sedimenting these fragments, and secondly, 
the fact that these precursor narratives exist in many versions, and their originality 
and authenticity are not easily established.

Thus, if The Recognitions can be said to foreground the problem of its
own intertextuality and to elicit an “archeological perspective” by repeating 
an apparently originary narrative, the status and significance of
this “original” is also thrown into question by the very fact that it only
exists as a series of multiple versions and transformations.*

Such narrative layerings may also suggest that Gaddis has adopted
Joyce’s mythical re as an organizational device; in fact, as Bernard
Kkenstock has convincingly demonstrated, Gaddis is profoundly indebted
to Joyce for both textual and thematic borrowings.* At the conclusion
of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Stephen Dedalus sets out
to “forge in the smithy of [his] soul the uncreated conscience of [his]
race,” What appears to interest Gaddis is the ambiguity of the verb “to
forge,” and the paradox by which a forgery can yield “recognitions” of
reality. Such recognitions confront us with the textual nature of perception,
since they make us conscious, through the play of repetition
and difference, of the differential nature of perception and language.

Nor it is only when one is confronted with multiple forgeries and 
imitations that the “original” becomes a problem—as if in a peculiar way
the forgery original, which didn’t exist beforehand as an
original,

Moreover, in the case of visual art, the copy of an original work had
its Own value well into the nineteenth century, when copying was still
considered an acceptable practice. Only in our own time has the copy
become illegitimate, and the hallmark of the inauthentic. As soon as the
work of art can no longer be said to represent an objective order (of
God, nature, society, or discourse) that both transcends and guarantees
the art’s validity, all art becomes “original,” but only as a sign of the
artist's subjectivity as it is revealed by his or her mark, gesture, or style.
Thus, it is often said that modern art no longer represents a content
(which can now be reproduced mechanically), but instead constitutes an
act of pictorial invention that draws upon the past for its inspiration,
forms, and motifs. According to this logic, what had been a form of
representation now becomes a repetition of forms, and the distinction

