The Recognitions is a movement or reversal that approximates in fictional terms 
what Deleuze describes as the “overturning” of Platonism: “in the infinite movement 
of degraded resemblance, from copy to copy, we reach this point where
everything changes nature, where the copy itself reverses into a simulacrum, 
where finally resemblance and spiritual imitation give place to
repetition.” This turning point or point of reversal is the conceptual
fulcrum upon which The Recognitions turns. More precisely, the central
“event” pervading The Recognitions must be envisioned as a reversal from
the Platonic paradigm of model and copy (or original and imitation) to
the Deleuzian (or Nietzschean) one of the simulacrum and phantasm.
Of course, it is not an “event” in the ordinary sense of the word, for it
is never reducible to a specific state of things. Instead, it takes place
according to what Deleuze calls the “time of Aion,” a time, that is, in
which the “event” has always already just happened or is always just
about to happen, but never occurs in the present moment.”? In more
ordinary language, The Recognitions at once presumes and anticipates this
reversal, even though it does not literally occur.

Gaddis’s novel is therefore “ambivalent” in a very strong sense: it both
looks back at Platonic recognition and forward to Deleuzian repetition,
and articulates this Janus-like state in a series of reversible images of
which the copy/counterfeit series is the most obvious. This reversibility
stems from an underlying structural ambivalence revealed in the coexistence 
of two antagonistic logics at work within The Recognitions.

According to the first or Platonic “logic,” an originary essence provides
e guarantee of truth, authenticity, and identity. A true recognition will
always have this essence (or its lack) as its content, which in turn can
only be conveyed by a true model or copy. In contrast, the second or
Nietzschean “logic” implies a series without a founding original or true
version. It might be formulated as follows: since there is no original, the
model for the copy is itself a copy, and the copy is the copy of a copy.
There can be no true recognition but only creative misrecognitions, since
every representation is always a displacement and a disguise. Behind the
mask covering the face, there is only another mask; underneath interpretations 
covering over the facts, there are only other interpretations;
there is no proper or literal meaning to words, only figurative meanings
which have lost their sensuous power, and concepts are only dissembled
metaphors. Finally, there is no authentic version of a text, only translations; 
no truth, only pastiche and parody, misquotation and dissemination.”°

In the terms of this second logic, Plato’s distinction between the simulacrum 
and the “good” copy no longer holds, for there can be no
pre-existent model for the copy to be true to. Instead, the “model” must
now be understood as having been established in an act of belated induction 
from the copy that is purportedly true to it, produced as an
aftereffect so to speak, and then hypostatized as the origin. As a fabricator
of paintings that are actually simulacra, Wyatt creates or invents “models”
which are based on the copies he is trying to emulate. In other words,
with this act of reference really the consequence of an originary difference
opened up by the notion of the copy itself.”

In The Recognitions, these two opposed “logics” or understandings of
the model-copy relationship are intricated in what Mikhail Bakhtin calls
a “dialogic,” which allows both to operate simultaneously. More precisely, 
The Recognitions is constituted according to a dialogic founded on
the Platonic model-copy paradigm and its simultaneous subversion or
overturning. In this double perspective, each “bad” copy or counterfeit
must be read as a simulacrum, but either in the Platonic or the Deleuzian
sense, depending on the context. Similarly, the narrative as a whole must
be read as re-enacting the fragmentation and loss of some primal authoritative 
center or agency predicated on Platonic distinctions and as a
reversal into an emergent multiplicity brought about through the resurfacing 
and proliferation of simulacra. In this latter perspective,
however, such a loss can be seen only as an illusion. The points to be
emphasized are that the novel oscillates between these two irreconcilable
articulations and that no synthesis is possible.
