This is an important key to  developing client loyalty, 
since client satisfaction is a function of
expectations versus perceived performance. If you can 
understand and manage what clients expect, the odds go up
dramatically that you will end up successful. 

A good adviser listens with the heart as well as the head.”

° “The really empathetic professionals listen to what I
mean, not what I say.”

e “A session with a good adviser is a discussion, not a
lecture.”

e “The people I am comfortable going back to time
after time .. . they are the ones who think about my
needs and how to address them, not about the project
they want to sell me.”

* “The professionals I deal with must be genuinely interested in my issues and problems.”

*° “The adviser must know how to contextualize recommendations, making them both relevant to my
company’s unique problems and understandable to.
my executives and me.”

° “The truly great advisers gain a deep understanding of
my industry, of my organization, and, most important,
of me as an executive and as a person—that’s when a
long-term relationship develops.”

UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONS, THOUGHTS,
AND CONTEXT

Empathy enables you to tune into your client’s mood,
frame of mind, and concerns. Understanding emotions is the
delighting them with your first aspect of empathy: individuals 
who are good at this know when to press their point and when to 
change the subject. They can sense the mood of an audience and understand
when they’re losing the crowd and when it’s appropriate to
crack a joke. Many great orators—Martin Luther King, Jr.
is a wonderful example—have a well-developed ability to
perceive and be affected by emotions. _

Empathy is also the ability to understand thoughts, to
hear rather than just listen. When a client says, “I’ll think
about it,” does he really mean it, or is this a brush-off? Part of
this understanding is based on a grasp of how a client thinks.
resident Richard M. Nixon, for example, used to call up Sec-

retary of State Henry Kissinger in the middle of the night and ©

demand that a certain aide be fired immediately. “Get rid of
the son of a bitch,” he would shout into the phone. Sometimes, he would make three or four calls in succession, repeating the message again and again: “I want him out—have
you fired him yet?” Kissinger always did nothing for at least a
week; more often than not Nixon would never bring the subject up again. The message was not really to fire the individual, but rather, “’m angry with this guy and distrust his
loyalties. Keep an eye on him.”

Understanding Context.

Professionals who excel at developing broad-gauge relationships are skilled in yet a third type of empathy, which we
call contextual empathy, or the ability to understand _and_ apprectuia the Cont arin AEE HOE eS Woataie
forces and pressures acting on the client at the moment?
How are her relationships with peers? With the boss? Is she
happy at work? What’s happening in the marketplace—or
on a personal level—that may be affecting her moods,
thought processes, and sensitivities? Being ignorant of, or
insensitive to, this context is a common mistake of young
professionals.