

agree to an accounting practice that I feel is wrong? The
are no simple rules for how to conduct yourself. Hemingway's
quip that “I only know that moral is what you feel good before
and immoral is what you feel bad after” ' can take you only so
far. One good principle to follow as a professional is what W
call the “light-of-day” test. Whatever action you take, be it 
staying in a certain class of hotel or meeting with a client’s 
com petitor, would you be comfortable discussing it with your
client the next morning in the full light of day? 

What if you were interviewed on television and asked about something
you did? Would you feel comfortable explaining it?

“Anything related to issues of integrity, trust, and ethics
are fatal flaws” !®5 commented Rebecca Guerra, the vice presi
dent for human resources at eBay, the online auction house,
Speaking to The New York Times, she emphasized that while
failure in one’s past was OK, questions about character were
unacceptable to her company.

Another way of looking at this is that you shouldn’t have
any secrets. By secrets we don’t mean confidential client information, 
which you are duty-bound to protect. Rather, you,
should have nothing to hide; you should be comfortable
sharing details of your professional conduct with a client,
without embarrassment or defensiveness.

Reducing Your Client’s Risk

Recall that the amount of trust a client has in you will go
up or down depending on the risk he perceives. You can do
several things to reduce this risk. First of all, you have to ‘
demonstrate consistency and reliability right from the start, —
even for the smallest of things. Showing integrity itself, in
other words, reduces risk.

Second, you can either implicitly or explicitly guarantee
your work. A guarantee doesn’t have to take the form of a 
certificate that your clients mail in to you. More likely, it will be
an understanding between you and your client. You want
your clients to feel that if they are not satisfied at any time
with your work, you will rectify it as best 

The words “we’ll work on this until you’re satisfied” can be
the occasional reminder of the fact that you’ll stand behind
your work and strive to address any issues they may have with
your performance.

WHEN TRUST IS LOST

Sometimes, even though you feel you have demonstrated a high 
level of integrity and competence, trust is lost.
Here are some principles to remember about losing trust:

know. Because the symptoms of a loss of trust can be so varied, 
and because some of them can also signify other problems or issues, 
it’s always hard to pinpoint when your client
stops trusting you. Perhaps you lose a follow-on assignment
that you were sure you would win; or suddenly the client
throws your business open for a competitive bid. Often, a
client can’t even articulate that she’s lost trust in you. She
I feels a vague dissatisfaction, and she stops sharing information 
with you and turning to you for advice. You have to watch
and listen very carefully.

As we suggested in chapter 3 on empathy, it’s useful to
hold a frank and open discussion with your client when the
engagement ends, something that is easier to do if you set the
expectation, right up front, that you’ll be having this discussion 
three or six months down the road. 

Unfortunately, by the time you discover that the trust has dried up, 
it may be too late to do anything about it.

Clients don’t care why you let them down. Unless a catastrophe has 
occurred—an earthquake or a death in the family—
clients, like most people, don’t particularly care what the
reason was that caused you not to deliver on a commitment.
You may believe you had perfectly good reason to let them