

point is that everyone thinks he knows something about
our business. Clients hire us for our expertise and
knowledge, but then they don’t recognize it, 

Even the best professionals occasionally find themselves
in awkward situations with no easy way out, or at the be I
call of difficult clients they wish would go ae Based ol
discussions with many extraordinary professionals aiid
manding clients, as well as on our own experiences as
ers, we've identified the most important pitta fe
professionals. The first set of pitfalls relates to the seven a
tributes we've described in this book. The second set c é

cerns either difficult situations i
or types of advisers and clien
that should be avoided. —

WHEN THE SEVEN ATTRIBUTES
ARE OUT OF BALANCE

hey talents, skills, and attitudes of great professionals
neatly combine into a powerful whole when they are exe
Elvis with balance and moderation. When individual at
e utes are taken to either negative or positive extremes,
wae ue result is dysfunctional and even neurotic behavior. 

The trick is to achieve equilibrium. Let’s exa tribute in turn: —
Selfless independence is by definition a delicate balance between 
client dedication and detachment. When this balance
is i achieved, professionals veer toward one extreme or the
er. If you are too selfless, you become subservient to your I
I c aa and can be exploited by them. If you are overly , 
you become aloof and detached and never develop
collaborative aspects of the relationship. You go back to
being a mere purveyor of expertise rather th :
Hea p an a broad-based
: hen empathy is in balance you are able to tune into your
client’s feelings, thoughts, and context. You have an attitude
of healthy humility; you demonstrate strong self-awareness
and self-control; and you benefit from well-honed listening
skills. When you have too much empathy, you overly identify
with your client. Your judgment gets clouded because you're
worried about hurting your client’s feelings, or upsetting
him. You lose your objectivity. If you have too little empathy,
on the other hand, you become insensitive, and you stop
learning.

A deep generalist in balance is a professional with a passion for learning, 
who has great expertise in one subject but
also deep knowledge about his clients, the industries he
works in, and the business functions that influence his work.
He engages in extensive exploratory learning and uses multiple learning 
methods to deepen and broaden his knowledge base.

When learning becomes superficial or overly broad,
however, there is imbalance. You become a dilettante, 
someone who has a superficial knowledge of many things with no
deep expertise. You are full of clever management sound
bites, such as “underpromise and overdeliver,” “empowerment 
is critical,” and “cash is king,” but there is no depth of
understanding behind the concepts. At the opposite extreme, 
you can become overly specialized and never break
out of the prison that is your narrow expertise.

A good big-picture thinker has strong powers of analysis
and synthesis. She identifies critical issues, sees the whole 
picture, and then uses a variety of tools for synthesis such as
analogies, frameworks, multiple perspectives, and pattern
recognition. She regularly engages in practices that aid 
synthesis—suspension of judgment, solitary reflection, wholebrain thinking, 
and so on.

If you have a positive imbalance of synthesis—too much
big-picture thinking—you develop a generalized understanding of 
the problem with no appreciation of the details.
You tend to issue-sweeping platitudes rather than specific recommendations. 

Clients feel you’re “up at 35,000 feet” when
they need a close-up view as well. You tell your client, 
for example, that he’s got to “leverage key resources,” and he walks