

that is the ability to arrive at opinions about issues; the power
of comparing and deciding; good sense.® 

The elements that contribute to sound judgment can be
expressed in a formula with three basic parts:

Judgment = (Facts) x (Experience) x (Personal Values)

The facts about the issue at hand—too few and you ll be hip
shooting, too many and you'll risk overanalyzing the s
tion—represent the first major input. Experience, w
fuels intuition, is the mechanism by which the adviser ad
and processes these facts. Good decision makers then filter
the resulting options through a strong set of personal beliefs
and values. 

Historically, good judgment was associated with age and
experience. The elders in a society were considered the wis
est, and therefore they were consulted on the most important
decisions. Today, there are several, contradictory schools of
thought on what constitutes good Judgment and decision
making. Most researchers in the field embrace the cognitive ©
model and believe that solid judgments can only be reached
through a highly logical, step-by-step, rational process, 
focusing almost exclusively on the factual inputs described in our
judgment formula. Many popular books have been written.
that propose this approach, and they’re filled with elaborate,
quantitative tables and charts, which decision makers are
supposed to use in order to come to sound conclusions. Unfortunately, 
research into decision making in the real world ©
clearly demonstrates that good decision makers rarely under-_
take this much rational analysis. 

Another, smaller group of scholars believes that judgment is essentially 
intuitive, and that most real-world decisions are made with little analysis. 
Based on our own research into professionals and the clients who employ them, 
we believe that the best decision makers blend these two approaches—cognitive and intuitive—and they add a third
dimension, which is the personal value system.

Developing Great Judgment IS9

}iVE STEPS TO GOOD JUDGMENT

Great professionals excel at a number of specific prac-

jices that underpin sound judgment. They:

¢ Frame problems appropriately at the outset

¢ Engage in creative but selective fact gathering

¢ Use intuition: they leverage their personal experience
to find similar patterns and relevant analogs

° Filter their judgments through a clear set of personal
beliefs and values

e Are honest enough to learn from experience

I. Frame the Problem

The first critical step is to identify the right problem and
frame it correctly. Diagnosing the wrong problem is one of
the most common mistakes that professionals make, regardless of their field. Many corporate executives will ask consultants to help “reorganize,” when the real problem—for
example, ineffective communication or poor leadership—
often has nothing to do with organizational structure.

Professor Joseph Bower of Harvard Business School,
who actively consults to industry leaders, told us the following
story about problem framing, or rather, reframing:

The head of a large company called me in to advise
on a major revitalization program that he wanted to
launch. He had identified a host of problems with his organization structure, distribution network, technology
platforms, and so on. He was also going to engage a large
consulting firm to help with the effort. I sat in on the
kick-off meeting with the CEO and his fifteen top executives. For two hours the CEO waxed eloquent about the
need to change, and the new program he was about to
launch. There was little discussion, and the meeting