
The major components of an astrolabe are the mater, the Jin
the plate, and the crete. The mater is the framework that holds 
other pieces together. The limb is a circular scale around the pt
meter of the mater. The limb is inscribed with a 360° scale and a
24-hour scale. In either case, the limb is a representation of I
structure of sidereal time. Each astrolabe is really a kit that can
assembled differently according to the circumstances of its use:

As the configuration of the celestial coordinates changes according
to the latitude of the observer, a set of removable plates—som
times as many as six, engraved on both sides—is usually supplied
fitting into the hollow of the mater, so that the user can select
plate most appropriate to his own latitude. 

The interchangeable plates capture regularities in the effects of 
server latitude on the relations of the celestial coordinates to the
local horizon. Of course, it is not possible to provide a plate for
every observer latitude, since latitudes are infinite in number. TI
plates provide a coarse discrete representation of the effects of 
captures the locational relationships of the stars to one another a
that of the sun to the stars.

(and much more) into coordination just the right way so that the
interactions of these variables can be controlled in the manipulation
 of the physical parts of the instrument. An astrolabe can bi
made of durable materials because the regularities it capture}
change only very slowly. The variables that do change, observe}
latitude and time of observation, are represented in the physical
structure of the astrolabe either by changeable parts (plates for each
latitude) or by changeable relations among parts (the rotation of the
rete about the axis with respect to the plate and the limb). The
constraints of the represented world are thus built into the physical
structure of the device. The astrolabe is a manipulable model of the
heavens—a simulator of the effects of time and latitude on the 
relationships of the heavens to the horizon. 

The astrolabe is an earl example of a general trend toward the 
representation and solution of computational problems via physical
 manipulations of carefully constructed artifacts.


Frake (1985) provides an especially interesting example of the
ways in which a variety of kinds of structure are combined in a
single artifact to create a computational system. Frake is interested
in what Northern European sailors knew about the tides and how
they went about knowing what they know. Although he is interested in the tides,
 his account begins with the so-called wind rose:

The schema of directions ... resulted from a successive division of
the quadrants of a horizon circle formed by north-south and eastwest lines
 into 8, 16, and finally 32 named (not numbered)
points.... Similar schemata for segmenting the circle of the horizon 
with invariant directional axes characterize all known early
seafaring traditions: those of the Pacific, the China Sea, the Indian
Ocean and Europe. In the various traditions, compass directions
could be thought of as, and named for, star paths (as in the Pacific
and the Indian Ocean) or wind directions (as in island southeast
Asia and Europe). In all cases, the compass rose provided an invariant 
representation of directions which were, in fact, determined
at sea by a variety of means: the sun, stars, winds, swells, 
landmarks, seamarks, sea life and, in later times, the magnetic needle.
(Frake 1985: 262)

The wind rose is an ancient schema that, for most of its history
and in most places, had nothing in particular to do with representing
knowledge of the tides. In the Mediterranean, for example, the
tides vary so little that mariners can safely disregard them. In
Northern Europe, by contrast, tidal variations are large, and the
ability to predict the tides is of great value to mariners. The use of
the medieval compass rose in the prediction of tides is a fine example 
of the empirical construction of an artifact in the absence of
a theory of the phenomenon it permits navigators to predict.

The compass rose as a schema for the expression of directions
was appropriated as a schema for the representation of time as well
(see figure 2.19):

In whatever manner time was determined at some moment, it was
thought of and expressed as a compass bearing. 