


The proper unit of analysis is, thus, not bounded by the skin of
skull. It includes the socio-material environment of the person,
the boundaries of the system may shift during the course. 
Temporal boundaries are important too. As the analysis of
construction of the task environment in chapter 3 showed, 
boundaries on the temporal extent of the unit of analysis also r
cutting pathways in ways that leave things inexplicable. In 1]
present context, many things remain inexplicable until we consider
the history of the person in the task environment. This seems
epecially pertinent to the nature of learning, since learning must Wy
consequence of interaction with an environment through time.

In a section titled ‘External Representation and Formal Reasoning
,” Rumelhart et al. (1986) sketch a proposal for a view of symbolic
 processing that fits well with what has been proposed 
They describe doing place-value multiplication with paper am
pencil as follows:

Each cycle of this operation involves first creating a representatiol
through manipulation of the environment, then a processing of th
(actual physical) representation by means of our well-tuned pet
ceptual apparatus leading to further modification of this repré
sentation. By doing this we reduce a very abstract_conceptud
problem_ to_a_series of operations that are very concrete and at
. 
This is real symbol processing and, we are beginning to think,
 the primary symbol processing that
we are able to do.

They account for internal symbol processing as follows:

Not only can we manipulate the physical environment and then
process it, we can also learn to internalize the representations we
create, “imagine” them, and then process these imagined 
representations—just as if they were external.

With experience we learn about the regularities of the world
of external symbolic tokens and we form mental models of the
behaviors of these symbolic tokens that permit us to perform the
manipulations and to anticipate the possible manipulations. With
even more experience, we can imagine the symbolic world and

apply our knowledge, gained from interactions with real physical
symbol tokens, to the manipulations of the imagined symbolic
worlds. “Indeed,’’ Rumelhart et al. note, “we think that the idea
that we reason with mental models is a powerful one precisely 
because it is about this process of imagining an external 
representation and operating on that.”

These ideas also apply to interactions among individuals.
Rumelhart et al. propose that we can also imagine aspects of
interactions and then operate on or with the image of external
representations:

We can be instructed to behave in a particular way. Responding to
instructions in this way can be viewed simply as responding to
some environmental event. We can also remember such an instruction 
and “tell ourselves” what to do. We have, in this way, internalized 
the instruction. We believe that the process of following
instructions is essentially the same whether we have told ourselves
or have been told what to do. Thus, even here, we have a kind
of internalization of an external representational format (i.e.,
language).

The practice of navigation includes many instances of this kind of
instruction. In an example given at the end of chapter 6, a novice
and an expert quartermaster organized their activity around a
written form. That example was actually more complex than any
considered by Rumelhart et al., but the processes they propose
should apply here too. In that example, the novice organized his
own actions by coordinating them with the actions of the expert.
The development of sequential control of action also concerns the
relationship of public and private symbol systems and the processes 
that link them.

In this chapter I will integrate the functional-systems perspective
with Bateson’s unit of analysis and Rumelhart’s notions of imagining 
external representations into an account of how internal structures 
may form as a consequence of experience.

Constructing Action Sequences

There are many ways to construct the sequence of actions that
constitutes the fix cycle. Quartermasters who get navigation 
training in school first encounter the sequence of actions of the fix cycle
as a written list of steps to be performed.