THE GEOMETRIC MENTALITY

Bible is not a single unified text written by God Almighty himself, by
mishmash of historical materials assembled by many generations and
whitewashed with a thin plaster by schools of priests supported by t
palace. As apologists for the class in power, the priests were trying to h
on to cultural identity in an impossible place. The Palestine of Samson’s tit
like the Balkans of today, was a crossroads, a rural halfway house between
more advanced civilizations. At a crossroads between Egypt and Mesopotamia, 
Palestine was a difficult place to live if one wished to have either
purity instead of cultural diversity. Precisely because these crossroads
between civilizations are often passed over and more primitive, they can I
sullen, resentful, paranoid, and violent; they can explode with a savibf
commitment to “ethnic cleansing” that the more sophisticated, cosmopolitian
and multicultural centers of civilization can neither understand nor ace 1

The religiously sanctified violence in Bosnia today is both repulsive
and inconceivable to someone living in the new planetary culture of the a
twentieth century. One part of humanity has shifted into the musical am
noetic polities of the next millennium at the very same historical time that
the rest of humanity is tearing itself to pieces in seizures of religious hatred
and violence. There is, of course, a very good chance that this violence ma
become universal and that what is happening in the Balkans could spree
throughout the world. Serbia could, recalling the Middle Ages, reclaim
Kosovo in Macedonia, and this could signal the explosion of ethnic warfare
as the nativistic reaction to global electronic integration. We could have the
Serbs fighting the Albanians and the Macedonians, the Greeks fighting h
Serbs and the Turks, the Turks fighting the Greeks and the Kurds, the Ku :
fighting the Turks and the Iraqis, the Armenians fighting the Azeris, th
Israelis fighting the Iranians, the Chechnyans fighting the Russians, and on
and on, across Russia, Tibet, and China. But we Americans would not b
safe from these seizures of ethnic violence, for within our multicultural
society, groups such as Aryan nation would attack African Americana
Asians, and Hispanics. To our north, the Quebecois of the rural areas would
seek to burn out the Asian grocers of Montreal, those ethnics who denied
them sovereignty in the last referendum on Canadian nationhood, and North
America would become as crazy as the Balkans or the Middle East.

If we wish to awaken from what James Joyce called “the nightmare
of history,” then we need to understand this linkage between an electronic
technology that brings humanity together in a World Wide Web and the
disintegrations of human identity that explode in desperate seizures of
illusory ethnic purity. Serbia today, having never achieved the cultural
obssesion of the adjacent Ottoman and Hapsburg empires, explodes in
\#tives of paranoid violence, delusionary victimization, and hysterical rage
far self-expression that for us Americans appear to be lunatic forms of
lensiveness in fantasies of martyrdom. But this cultural explosion is no
iilerent in kind from the bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma
ly. If we are going to avoid the complete balkanization of the planet, we
vied to understand that the spiritual evolution of humanity to a higher level
al consciousness — what Sri Aurobindo called “the Supramental Manifestajun" 
—has turned religion into an evolutionary backwater of violence and
sillen dissolution. Here again, we need to remember that whenever a
form is about to disappear it has its most intense expressions. The
Wides pyramids are built during the Mayan collapse; the tallest totem poles
carved at the end of that Pacific Northwest culture, and the largest
perchurches” are to be found today in Atlanta and Dallas.

There is, of course, a very good chance that humanity simply will not
ailvance into a new planetary culture, and that the prophecies of Sri
 Autobindo will have to be put off for another time, or another species. The
Wiple assault of global pollution, universal violence, and technological
 transformation may simply prove too much for humanity to bear. But since my
lile's work has been devoted to going against the mainstreams of American
vulture —by seeking to articulate this new planetary culture in an age of
wilinic violence, seeking to embody a postreligious spirituality in an age of
‘epopularized, Superbowl religions, and seeking to establish educational
alternatives such as Lindisfarne right at the time when giant communications
/orporations were consolidating publishing, bookstore chains, and the elecironic media into the absorption of education into the entertainment industry
ul celebrity management —I shall carry onto finish what I started. As Bishop
_Nerkeley said in going against the stream of the scientific materialism of his
ilay, “We Irish think otherwise.”
So, thinking otherwise, I want to turn to “the Good Book,” not to add
to the evangelical banalities that flood the satellite dish in my rural Colorado
hackyard, but as a way of understanding the bad in religion in an effort to
avoid it.

The little fragment of Judges 13:16 is the lesson for today. It stands
out perfectly by itself and reads like an archetypal folk story, be it of Jack
the Giant-Killer or Paul Bunyan. It has all the typical motifs of folklore: the
lormulaic repetitions, the three questions, the repetition of patterns in which
ihe wife tries to entice the husband and then Delilah tries to entice Samson,
aa well as the magical folklore motif of the angel of God who appears and