

If we restrict ourselves to the evidence of the endocranial casts that
show more highly developed language articulation centers for archaic Homo
sapiens than for Homo erectus, then we can say that oral culture was roughly
from 200,000 B.C.E. to 10,000 B.C.E., or basically the glacial epoch. Then the
system of signs on the walls of caves such as Lascaux began to become a
script. This script developed from the Old Europe of 6000 B.C.E.’ to the
Sumer of 3000 B.C.E. with the increase in the size of settlements, from Catal
Hiiyiik in Anatolia to Uruk in Mesopotamia. Priestcraft and writing reinforced 
one another to give us city-states that sometimes federated and at
other times conglomerated to expand into empires. With the rise of middleclass 
capitalism, with its “Gutenberg galaxy” of printed books and printed
money, these empires became replaced by industrial nation-states in a new
global formation called the world economy.

Culture (200,000 to 10,000 B.C.E.)
Society (10,000 to 3500 B.C.E.)
Civilization (3500 B.C.E. to 1500 C.E.)
Industrialization (1500 to 1945)
Planetization (1945 to present)



Each of these forms generated a unique polity.

Band

Tribe

City-State to empire
Nation-State

Noetic Polity ~

oO & Si be

And each of these generated its characteristic form of cohesive
association.

1. Dominance
2. Authority

OUR CONTEMPORARY PREDICAMENT 5

3. Justice

4A. Representation

The band was based on dominance. In Bonobo chimpanzee bands, we
see a system of female dominance; in other primate groupings we see forms
of male dominance, often but not always in the form of a single dominant
male. In the second level of the tribe, the characteristic form of cohesive
association is one of authority in the figure of a matriarch or a patriarch.
When tribes begin to cluster within more cosmopolitan cities—and this
transformation is described in the Old Testament in the social developments
from Saul to David to Solomon —literacy becomes critical, and a group of
palace high priests works to create a canonical sacred text that can hold the
warring tribes together within a literate and urban civilization. 

As an expanding trading class grows in numbers through world commerce, and as
literacy becomes democratized through printed books so that it is no longer
the prerogative of a class of high priests associated with a palace, then
pamphleteering, philosophy, argument, and discourse become the political
instruments for the shift from medievalism to modernism. The landed
aristocratic warrior and the priest lose power to the scientist and artist who
become the avatars of the new world of the mind. After the Depression and
the Second World War, this nationalistic culture of the grand philosophies
of the state went up in the smoke of the battle of the great ideologies: Fascism,
Communism, and Democracy. With the rise of the new postwar forms of
electronic communication, philosophy and reasoned discourse could no
longer hold together in the supersaturated solution of the global media.
Democracy was replaced by mediocracy; citizen was replaced by media
subject. 

Vast electronic latifundia took control of sports, entertainment,
politics, journalism, and education; in fact, all forms of culture simply
became variants of the entertainment industry. In the hands of a few giants
of industry—Ted Turner, John Malone, Michael Eisner, or Bill Gates —
new mergers, such as those of CNN and Time Warner or Disney and the
American Broadcasting Company, created new global streams of technoswill 
in which the believing subject was fed like cattle in feedlots. Neither
the scientist, the philosopher, nor the artist can counter this huge social
transformation. The scientist is dependent on the funding systems of late
capitalism for his or her costly research, and the solitary artist, in order to
communicate with this electronic society, must become a celebrity ~a personality 
managed by a publicist, a public figure constrained to turn ideas