 Coming into Being

In the hymn to the muses that serves as the opening to the Theogeny
Hesiod presents himself as a lowly shepherd alone on the mountain, startle
by an epiphany of the muses, This oxymoronio, humble exaltalion is to W
a foundational pattern; it becomes a literary archetype for a new form ¢

public solitude: public in that it is expressed in the cultural form of language
addressed to an audience or reader; and solitary in that the poet is not
to connect him to the memory of the race, the memory of creation aned th
generation of the gods in the ancient times before mankind existed.
medium of writing is innovative, but the content is archaic and filled with
synthesis of Aegean and Near Eastern mythological borrowings. In paleontology
there is a formula called “Romer’s Rule” that notes that an innovation

McLuhan noted a similarly paradoxical relationship when he noticed how
the early television of the 1950s filled up its airtime with old Western
to consciousness of itself as a radically new medium that was its own content
its own message. In his farmer’s almanac approach to knowledge, opininos 1
and culture, Hesiod is as conservative as our American farmer-poet Wendell
Berry, but Hesiod’s act of personal inscription of collective memory
contributing to the cultural shift away from the traditional mores of which
Eric Havelock calls “the Homeric Encyclopedia.”® Both “myth” and “nature” 
are becoming not shared participations in ritual, ceremony, and pe!
formance, but representations, that is to say, cultural, textual construction
Through this culturally new mental focusing of consciousness in the act I
writing, two new virtual worlds are brought forth; one is the interior worl
of mined and recollection, and the other is the i naapnaty landscape 
“nature” that is described but situated outside “the text.” This reconsttay tic
of nature into a text gives us the virtual reality of the pastoral of Hesiod’
“Works and Days,” which lays down an archetypal pattern for a literar
construction of nature in the new genre of pastoral and becomes the for
runner for Virgil’s “Eclogues.”

appear in which the aristocrats themselves were literate and did not depen
upon a specialist class of Phoenician traders or Egyptian priests to hold th
mysteries of writing for them. What made this cultural change possible wai
the shift from the hieratic complexities of cuneiform and hieroglyphics to th
simplified commercial notation of the Phoenician alphabet. Written Greek
became a performance of one’s own identity, one’s culture, and a new leisure
class had time to explore the fascinations of this new culture through writing.
The bard had evolved into the lyric poet, and although Sappho was more like
4 Suzanne Vega than a Jorie Graham in that her poems were songs meant to
be sung to an accompaniment on the lyre,’ their transcription and circulation
on papyrus served to extend the new cultural space of reading. Poetry was
atill a public performance —the Homeric hymns to the gods and, later, the
celebration of athletes and festivals in the odes of Pindar —but this new space,
in which the poet could both sing in public and be alone in the inscription of
thought in private, was bringing forth a new form of cultural solitude, an
oxymoronic state captured by the fragment often attributed to Sappho but
possibly the expression of one of the members of Sappho’s intimate circle of
aristocratic women on the isle of Lesbos:

{ The moon and Pleiades
are set. Midnight,

I and time spins away.

I lie in bed, alone, ™

There is some doubt concerning the attribution of this fragment to
Sappho herself, but since the poem has found its way into Sappho’s manuscripts, 
it can also be read as an expression of longing given to Sappho by
one of her lovers. The sky is full of the absence of moon and the autumnal
constellation, and the bed is filled with the absence of the beloved. But now
this new emptiness of solitude is filled with the act of writing that transforms
4 passing mood into a fixed state of artistic consciousness. This artistic
solitude is directed toward others: first to the absent lover, and second to
those who shiaite dite lanieen ie ead oalbura of omek poner. don vobanscel
sense of self is being brought forth by this process of writing in solitude that
is quite different from the self-effacing, Keatsian, negative capability of the
hurd, whether he is the bard of the //iad or the singer of the Third Dynasty
of Ur composing a new Akkadian version of the Epic of Gilgamesh. In this
selfhood that is brought to the fore, we are asked to envision not heroic
Achilles or Gilgamesh, but the poetess herself, alone in an enormously
extended landscape of the midnight sky, and filled with an erotic longing for
the touch of her absent lover. Almost by accident, this little fragment
stumbles upon the lyrical self alone in the universe, but the Greeks are not

the Romantics, and this poetess alone with the stars is not Wordsworth alone

SaaS