
 molecules, or cella, or trees in a forest, or animals in the wild, or
human minds in a collectivity one might wish to call, after the thinking of
Rudolf Steiner, a folk-voul, if it is tribally embedded in place, or a Zeitgeist, if
it is more distributively spread over a space but specific to a time.

At the twentieth anniversary meeting of the Lindisfarne Association
at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York, the chaos 
mathematician Ralph Abraham gave a performance of his mathematical quartet,
MIMI and the Iluminati. At this performance, Abraham explained that his
supercomputer was going to project on the two-story-high screen on the
high altar fractal patterns that would enable us to see sections of time that
were so small that they were unavailable to human experience. If their
temporal structure were transposed from time into space, we could see them
in the gorgeous patterns of light and sound that his quartet would perform
for us. And that is how I understand “angels.” Their temporal structure is
not the same as ours, so, normally, we don’t see them. We use various
reorganizations of time and space to provide a threshold of emergence for
them from their ontological domain into ours. A cathedral is on is one way to do
this, because the building of a cathedral is a temporal project that requires
the coordination of several generations or centuries. It is macrotime,
whereas Ralph Abraham’s quartet of supercomputer and three mathematicians 
performing musical externalizations of their temporal structures is
microtime. My bringing artists, scientists, and contemplatives together in
the Lindisfarne Fellowship is yet another way to express an emergent state
of consciousness in which a noetic polity emerges from our collectivity; an
ontological domain becomes accessible to us, or one can say, more mystically,
 that an angel or folk-soul begins to overlight the group. A great
concert often has the quality of presence that makes the audience feel as if
the space had suddenly become transformed or inhabited. In the cosmologies 
of Jewish Cabalism and Christian Neoplatonism, angels are organizations of 
mind that enter one ontological domain from another, when the
conditions become sufficiently coherent to foster the emanation. 
The Buddhist way to describe this is to say that these conditions are emergent and
not emanative. Varela is for emergence, Abraham is for emanation. So you
can take your choice.

Most contemporary scientists will opt for emergent properties in place
of mystical cosmologies of emanation, for emanation is simply too much for
them to handle while still keeping a hold on the scientific materialism to
which they are bound by acts of faith. So cognitive scientists like Patricia
and Paul Churchland will assert in childlike faith that if you connect enough

THE PAST EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS 29

seurons you will get “mind” as an emergent property. For these connectionists, mind is not an expression of the mystical mumbo jumbo of an
immortal soul, but rather an emergent property no different in kind from
ihe emergence of those gorgeous corkscrew spirals of the synchronized
spirochetes on the surface of the protist Mixotrycha paradoxa.

In the symbiotic evolution of the larger, eukaryotic cell, the larger
eritter discovers that the smaller one is more interesting and useful to it as
architecture than as food. Presumably the larger cell first surrounded the
smaller mitochondrion or chloroplast in the hopes of gobbling it up. But the
livtle cell resisted digestion, held on to its own ancient DNA, and insisted on
having its own life inside the larger cell. The larger cell began to “notice” in
its frustration in breaking the smaller one down through digestion, that the
little cell was producing food or oxygen, and that this process actually helped
the larger cell in the process of respiration and metabolism that the hefty
rucleus demanded. Therefore this new form of incorporation instead of
digestion enabled the new eukaryotic cell to grow to gigantic size. The little
vells continued on with their traditional life as organelles inside the new cell
with a nucleus, and this process of producing oxygen, as in the case of the
mitochondria, or photosynthesis, as in the case of the chloroplasts, worked
out better for everybody. Israel and Palestine are trying to relearn this
leason. Since it took the eukaryotic cell almost a billion years of evolution, I
juss it will take a little more time for Israel and Palestine —or Ulster and
lire —to get the picture, but it might help if politicians read Margulis’s book

Symbiosis in Cell Evolution and stopped to fanart the political implications
of biology for the politics of life. (~sS =

By doing what comes eakuillgy the — helped the slow and
sluggish archaebacterium to get at its food; together, they became the protist.
So this encounter with the Other in which both are intent on annihilating
the other in a simple immediate unconscious response of “Eat it!” changes
into “Hold it!” The spirochete only goes through half of the process of
chewing its way into the membrane of the other, and then is forced to stop.
And, of course, this is the great trick in life: knowing when to stop. So the

inhibition is as important as the excitation. First, you excite something, and
then right at the point of maximum excitation, you inhibit the function and
it spins into its opposite in a new emergent state. That is also the process of
Tantric yoga. First, you excite sexuality, and then at the point of maximum
excitement, you inhibit it, and this precipitates the unconscious. It’s like
speeding up in a car, only to slam on the brakes so that everything behind
you in the backseat is precipitated into the front: the unconscious is hurled