

whole system of chakras in the etheric body, What the yogis do not talk about
however, is that the immediate result of illumination is the illumination of one’
darkness. One’s instinctive self becomes activated, one’s preverbal mind,
especially the very first thought one had in coming out of the mother’s body
becomes intensely energized. There is an occult relationship between
mother and the experience of birth and the Tantric shakti and the experience
of yogic rebirth. This period of illumination is a very difficult an -time ol
confrontation with the shadow, v with the preconscious and unconscious &
companions to the first experience of the superconscious or samadhi.

If one is able to stumble one’s way through this stage, then the next
stage is initiation. The locus of activity for initiation is in the astral body.
This sequence of experiences is sort of like a foundation giving you “i
matching grant.” For each of the subtle bodies, a disembodied colleague it
sent to serve as a helper in the spiritual work. So for the etheric body, a jinn
is sent. I am taking this term from the Koran and Sufism in particular. We
get our word genie from this term, jinn. We humans are made of earth, but _
these elementals are made of fire. The jinn is the colleague of the shaman
and works close to the physical plane on the etheric plane. The jinn is good
at weather changes or ensouling machines or weapons to achieve magical
results. Race car drivers or jet pilots sometimes stumble unconsciously into”
this realm when they superstitiously ensoul their machines and then do
absolutely amazing feats that no ordinary driver or pilot can equal.

The colleague that emerges in the field of our astral body is what Jung
called the contrasexual anima-animus. I prefer to call this being Tara. Since
I am male, I will only speak from my own experience and consider this
spiritual guide as Tara. At some point in his contemplative practice, a man
stops projecting his desires onto women in the outside world and begins to
have, let us say, an active love life with an epiphany of the feminine in the I
psychic realm. This interior figure, such as Dante’s Beatrice, is an exalted
teacher who instructs men in the mysteries of life. At the level of the
conscious ego, this being is completely beyond the ego’s command and
control. She is in charge and determines when and just how deep the
relationship is to be. Eventually, after years of meditation and contemplative
practice, the psychic experience arises in which the man moves to the other
side of the river that divides the astral from the mental plane and there, at
that shore of other worlds, has sacred intercourse with Tara. This is the Aieros

This interior feminine modality of consciousness is, however, not a
single being, but rather a dual one and often appears in the man’s psychic
life in both the modality of, let us say, Kuan Yin, the universal mother of
compassion, and Tara, the individual initiatic consort and guide to spiritual
development. In Christian terms, one can think of this divine emanation as
the two Marys— Mary the universal mother, and Mary Magdalene the
consort. In Hinduism, this dyadic modality is expressed as the
 the creative force of the universe, and the individual tantric
 the initiatic consort to one’s yogic practice. So, for example, Sri
Aurobindo will speak of the mother or the cosmic vhakti, and at other times
of the mother of the ashram and his individual consort in the manifestation
of the supramental, Mira Alfassa Morrissey Richard.

The colleague, or matching grant, for the mental body, the
vi/nanamayakosa of the yogis, is what I choose to call the Seraph. This being,
unlike the eternal feminine form of Tara, does not appear in a human body.
This being is an angelic one whose consciousness is not polarized between
erotch and crown, genitals and brain, but is completely holographic —it is a
creature of a thousand eyes. The eyes seem like facets of a crystal and the
creature seems made more out of music and mathematics than flesh. The
music of Bach and the Cathedral of Chartres seem to be metaphors that
approach this form of universal life. This being is so transcendent to the
biological realm in which we take our human life that, at least from my
limited experience, it can only be experienced in states of yogic samadhi in
which the heart has stopped beating and one moves into extremely subtle
microsections of fractal time.

As each of these beings are brought forth and take up their symbiotic
life in the corresponding energy sheath of our subtle bodies, a moiré pattern
is created, an overlapping of elemental, psychic, and angelic energies that
creates “the holy grail.” Into this vessel of our expanded, symbiotic incarnation 
emerges the colleague of our highest body, the anandamayakosa, and this
being is called the Purushottama by Aurobindo or the “indwelling-Christ”
by David Spangler.

The Divine Comedy is also a description of this process of initiation. But
rather than presenting a jinn as a colleague for the etheric body, Dante
presents Virgil, a human being no longer confined to the world of the flesh.
Tara is Beatrice; the Seraph is the “Angel Sphere” of Canto 28; and the vision
of the face of Christ is the consummation of Canto 32, lines 85-88.
