

In opening and closing the gates of Heaven—can you play the part of
the female?


Lao Tzu is using “the gates of heaven” as a metaphor and icon
of the cosmic feminine, of what in yoga would be called the shakti: but
gates are also symbols of the chakras and the subtle body system. When o
sensitizes oneself through the practice of yoga, then one shifts one’s 
consciousness from the conventional feeling of the muscular, meat body to the
other swirls of energy. Then one begins to move through the gates of heaven
then one feels fan tien or Hara in Japanese Zen —the center below the navel
So Lao Tzu, here in the poem of chapter 10, is metaphorically describing.
particular yogic practice:

In cultivating and cleaning your profound mirror—can you do it so
that it has no blemish?”

Lao Tzu’s image of cleaning one’s profound mirror is one that passed over
from Taoism into Zen Buddhism. In his book Religion and Nothingnedd, 18 the
great Buddhist philosopher and Zen practitioner, Keiji Nishitani—whom I
met in Kyoto shortly before his death — discusses this metaphor of Dogen’
(the founder of the Soto Zen lineage) of the profound mirror inside the mind
and how through Zen meditation one must polish the mirror so that it is
without blemish. Another image that Nishitani uses is a silver bowl filled
with snow. There is a famous tale of koan practice in which the Zen master
looks at his student and asks him, “Have you had your breakfast?” The
student answers yes, and then the master responds by saying, “Then clean
your bowl.” Koan language is a highly metaphoric code in which practitioners 
signal back and forth to one another in the highly stylized culture of the
Zen monastery. What this language means, when translated into our sensibility, 
is this: The Zen master, being an advanced initiate, can see the aura
in loving the people and giving life to the state —can you do it
without using knowledge?

In opening and closing the gates of Heaven —can you play the
part of the female?

Can you become passive? Can you get out of your own way? Can you give
birth without trying to own the child? All the metaphors chosen are 
expressions of the feminine. Henricks’s translation concludes:

Give birth to them and nourish them.

Give birth to them but don’t try to own them;
Help them to grow but don’t rule them.

That is called Profound Virtue.

“Virtue” is not Le mot juste, but we don’t have a word for it; presumably,
the word should be something like fernina. All in all, when one tries to reach
across time to enter into the spirit of the Tao Te Ching, it is necessary to read I
more than one translation. The translation that inspired me whens I was a
teenager was the verse translations of R. B. Blackney, which I still prefer to
Mitchell’s, but Henricks’s is very good and does enable one to recognize the
esoteric practices. Each translator has his own agenda, and so if he is 
sensitive New Age male from Marin County who max done some Zen,
what you are going to get is a White sensitive male’s New Age
that will make it sound as if it were written in northern California .