 I recollect that in the prison scene in my Egmont,
where the sentence is read to him, Schiller would have made
Alva appear in the background, masked and muffled in a
cloak, enjoying the effect the sentence would produce on
Egmont. Thus Alva was to show himself insatiable in revenge
and malice. I, however, protested, and prevented the apparition.
He was a great,odd man.  

“Every week he became different and more finished ; each
time I saw him he seemed to me to have advanced in
learning and judgment. His letters are the fairest memorials
of him that I possess, and they are also among the best of his
writings. His last letter I preserve as a sacred relic.” He rose
and fetched it. ‘See and read it,” said he, giving it to me.

It was a very fine letter, written in a boldhand. It contained
an opinion of Goethe’s notes to Rameau’s Nephew, which exhibit
French literature at that time, and which he had given Schiller
to look over. I read the letter aloud to Riemer. “You see,
said Goethe, “how apt and consistent is his judgment, and
that the handwriting nowhere shows trace of weakness. He
was a splendid man, and went from us in all the fulness of his
strength. This letter is dated the 24th of April, 1805. Schiller
died on the 9th of May.” ;

We looked at the letter by turns, and were pleased with the
clear style and fine handwriting. Goethe gave further affectionate 
reminiscence of his friend, until it was nearly eleven
o’clock, and we departed.

Thursday, February 24, 1825.

“If I were still superintendent of the theatre,” said Goethe,
this evening, “I would bring out Byron’s Doge of Venice. The
piece is indeed long, and would require shortening. Nothing,
however, should be cut out; but the import of each scene should
be taken, and expressed more concisely. The piece would
thus be brought closer together, without being damaged by
alterations; and it would gain powerful effect, without essential
loss of beauty.” .

This opinion of Goethe’s gave me a new view as to how we
might proceed on the stage, In a hundred similar cases; it
requires, however, a fine intellect—nay, a poet, who understands 
his vocation. ;

We talked more about Lord Byron; and I mentioned how,
in his conversations with Medwin, he had said there was 
something extremely difficult and unthankful in writing for the
theatre. ‘“‘The great point is,” said Goethe, “for the poet to
strike into the path which the taste and interest of the public
have taken. If the direction of his talent accords with that
of the public, everything is gained. Houwald hit this path
with his Bild (Picture), and hence the universal applause he
received. Lord Byron, perhaps, would not have been so
fortunate, as his tendency was not that of the public. The
greatness of the poet is not the main requisite. On the contrary, 
one who is little elevated above the general public may
gain the most general favour precisely on that account.’

We continued about Byron, and Goethe said: “That which
I call invention I never saw in anyone in the world to a greater
degree. His manner of loosing a dramatic knot is always
better than one would anticipate.”

“That,” said I, “is what I feel about Shakespeare—especially
when Falstaff has entangled himself in a net of falsehoods, and
I ask myself what I should do to help him out; for I find 
Shakespeare surpasses all my notions. That you say the same of
Lord Byron is the highest praise. Nevertheless,” I added,
“the poet who takes a clear survey of beginning and end, has
by far the advantage with the biassed reader.”

Goethe agreed with me, and laughed to think that Lord
Byron, who in practical life could never adapt himself and
never even asked about a law, finally subjected himself to the
stupidest of laws—that of the three unities.

“He understood the purpose of this law,” said he, “no better
than the rest of the world. Comprehensibility 1 is the purpose,
and the three unities are only so far good as they conduce to
this end. If the observance of them hinders the comprehension
of a work, it is foolish to treat them as laws. Even the Greeks,
from whom the rule was taken, did not always follow it. In
the Phaeton of Euripides, and in other pieces, there is a change
of place; and it is obvious that good representation of their
subject was with them more important than blind obedience
to law, which in itself is of no great consequence. The pieces
of Shakespeare deviate, as far as possible, from the unities of
time and place; but they are comprehensible—nothing more
so—and on this account the Greeks would have found no fault
in them. The French poets have endeavoured to follow most
