
This morning, a card from Goethe, written by his own hand
desired me to come to him. I went and stayed an hour. He
seemed quite different from yesterday, and had the impetuous
and decided manner of a youth.

He entered, bringing. two thick books. “It is not well,”
said he, “that you should go from us so soon; let us become
better acquainted. But, as the field of generalities is so wide,
I have thought of something in particular, which may serve as
a ground-work for intercourse. These two volumes contain the’
Frankfort Literary Notices of the years 1772 and 1773, among
which are almost all my little critiques written at that time.
These are not marked; but, as you are familiar with my style
and tone of thought, you will easily distinguish them from the
others. I would. have you examine somewhat more closely
these youthful productions, and tell me what you think of them.
I wish to know whether they deserve a place in a future edition
of my works. From my present self these things stand so far,
that I have no judgment about them. But you younger people
can tell whether they are to you of any value, and how far they
suit our present point of view. I have already had copies taken,
which you can have by and by to compare with the originals.
Afterwards we might ascertain whether here and there some
trifle might not be left out, or touched up without injuring
the whole.”

I replied, I would gladly make the attempt.

“You will find yourself perfectly competent,” said he, “when
you have once entered on the task ; it will come quite naturally.”

He then told me he ‘intended to set off for Marienbad in a
week; and he should be glad if I could remain at Weimar till
then, that we might become better acquainted.

“T wish, too,” said he, “you would not merely pass a few
days or weeks in Jena, but live there all the summer, till I
return from Marienbad towards the.autumn. Already I have
written about a lodging for you and other things necessary to
make your stay pleasant.

“You will find there the most various resources and mans
for further studies, and a very cultivated circle; besides, the
country has so many aspects, that you may take fifty walks,
each different from the others, each pleasant, and almost all
suited for undisturbed thought. You will find there plenty of
leisure to write many new things for yourself, and also to
accomplish my designs.”

I could make no objection to such good proposals, and
consented joyfully. When I departed, he was especially amiable,
and fixed an hour the day after to-morrow for further converse.