

of prey to drag about pieces torn from the dead body and thus
to defile the altars—an action so offensive to both gods and
men is not politically virtuous, but a political crime. Besides,
he has everybody in the play against him. He has the elders
of the state, who form the chorus, against him; he has the
people at large against him ; he has Teiresias against him ; he has
his own family against him: but he hears not, and obstinately
persists in his impiety; until he has brought to
belong to him, and is himself at last nothing but
I “And still,” said I, “when we hear him
\on help believing he is somewhat in the right.”
“That is the very thing,” said Goethe, “in which Sophocles
is a master; and in which ruin all who a shadow.”


“Evidently, in his youth, he enjoyed education, by which he
upon as a blemish, and I would give philologist to prove that it is 
interpolate of eloquence, an excellent rhetorical
became trained to look for all the reasons and seeming reasons of things. 
Still, his great talent in this respect betrayed him into faults: he so
too far. ‘There is a passage in Antigone which sometimes went
After the heroine has explained the noble motives for her action,
and displayed the elevated purity of her soul, she at last, when
she is led to death, brings forward a motive that is quite unworthy
and almost borders upon the comic.

She says that, if she had been a mother, she would not have done, 
either for her dead husband, what she has done for her 
children or for her dead brother. ‘For,’ says she, 
“if my husband died children died I could have had others
by my new husband. But with my brother, the case is different.
I cannot have another brother ; for, since my mother and father
are dead, there is nobody to beget one.’
bare sense of this passage, 

“This is, at least, the
my opinion, when placed in the mouth of a
death, disturbs the tragic ton
—to savour too much of dialectical calculation.

We conversed further upon Sophocles, remark
pieces he always less considered a moral tendency than an apt
treatment of the subject, effect.
 

“I do not object,” said Goethe, “to a dramatic poet having
a moral influence in view; but, when the point is to bring his
subject clearly and effectively before his audience, his moral
purpose proves of little use, and he needs much more a faculty
for delineation and a familiarity with the stage to know what
to do and what to leave undone. If there be a moral in the
subject, it will appear, and the poet has nothing to consider
but the effective and artistic treatment of his subject. If a
poet has as high a soul as Sophocles, his influence will always
be moral, let him do what he will. Besides, he knew the stage,
and understood his craft thoroughly.”

“ How well he knew the theatre,” answered I, “ and how much
he had in view a theatrical effect, we see in his Philoctetes, and
the great resemblance this piece bears to CGdipus in Colonos,
in both arrangement and course of action.

“Tn each piece we see a hero in a helpless condition ; both are
old and suffering from bodily infirmities. Oeipus has at his
side his daughter as a guide and a prop; Philoctetes has his
bow. The resemblance is carried still further. Both have been
thrust aside in their afflictions; but, when the oracle declares
that victory can be obtained with their aid alone, endeavour is
made to get them back; Ulysses comes to Philoctetes, Creon
to Oedipus. Both begin their discourse with cunning and
honeyed words ; but when these are of no avail they use violence,
and we see Philoctetes deprived of his bow, and Cidipus of
his daughter.” 

“Such acts of violence,” said Goethe, “give an opportunity
for excellent altercations, and such situations of helplessness {
excited the emotions of the audience; on which account the a
poet, whose object it was to produce an effect upon the public,
liked to introduce them. In order to strengthen this effect in
the Cdipus, Sophocles brings him in as_a_weak old man—
whereas, according to all circumstances, he must have been a a
man still in the prime of life. But, at this vigorous age, the poet
could not have used him for his play; he would have produced SS
no effect, and he therefore made him a weak, helpless old man.” 


On the other hand, each of these passive heroes has two active
characters against him. Oedipus has Creon and Polyneices,
Philoctetes has Neoptolemus and Ulysses; two such opposing
characters were necessary to discuss the subject on all sides,
and to gain the necessary body and fulness for the piece.”