
Jena, September 15, 1823.

Goethe is returned safe from Marienbad ; but, as his countryhouse 
here is not so convenient as he requires, he will stay
only a few days. He is well and active, so that he can take
walks several miles long.

He began on my affairs:

“To speak out plainly, it is my wish that you should pass
this winter with me in Weimar. — With respect to poetry and
criticism: you have a natural foundation for them. They are
your profession, to which you must adhere, and which will soon
bring you a good livelihood. But yet there is much, not strictly
appertaining to this department, that you ought to know.
However, you should get over it quickly this winter in Weimar:
and you will wonder at the progress you have made by Easter;
because you will have the best means, which are in my hands,
Thus you will have laid a firm foundation for life. You will
have attained comfort, and will be able to go forward with
confidence.”

I replied that I would tegulate myself entirely by his wishes.

“With a home in my neighbourhood,” continued Goethe,
“I will provide you; you shall pass no unprofitable moment
during the whole winter. Much that is good is brought together
in Weimar; and you will find, in the higher circles, a society
equal to the best in any great city. Besides, many eminent
men are personally connected with me, With them you will
make acquaintance, and you will find their conversation in the
highest degree useful.”

Goethe mentioned many distinguished men, indicating the
peculiar merits of each.

“Where else,” he continued, “would you find so much good
in such a narrow space? We also possess an excellent library,
and a theatre which yields to none in Germany. Therefore,
I repeat, stay with us; and not only this winter, but make
Weimar your home. Thence proceed highways to all quarters
of the globe. In summer you can travel and see what you
wish. I have lived there fifty years; and where have I not
been? But I was always glad to return to Weimar.”

Jena, Thursday, September 18, 1823.
Yesterday morning, before Goethe’s return to ‘Weimar, I had
the happiness of another interview with him. What he said
at that time was to me quite invaluable. All the young poets
of Germany should know it.

1823] CONVERSATIONS OF GOETHE 7

He began by asking whether I had written any poems this
summer. I said I had indeed written ee ag: os the whole
I lacked the necessary ease. “ Beware,” said he, “of attempting
a large work. That A what injures our best minds, even those
finest in talent and most earnest in effort. I have suffered
from this cause, and know how much it injured me. What
have I not let fall into the well! If I had written all that I
well might, a hundred volumes would not contain it. ;

“The Present will have its rights; the thoughts and feelings
which daily press upon the poet will and should be expressed.
But, if you have a great work in your head, nothing else thrives
itself is for the time lost. What exertion and expenditure of
lisse it; all other thoughts are repelled, and the pleasure of life
mental force are required to arrange and round off a great
whole! and then what powers, and what a tranquil situation,
to express it with the proper fluency! If you have erred as to
the whole, all your toil is lost; and further, if, treating so 
extensive a subject, you are not perfectly master of your material
in the details, the whole will be defective, and censure will be
incurred. Thus, for all his toil and sacrifice, the poet gets,
instead of reward and pleasure, nothing but discomfort and a
paralysis of his powers. But if he daily seizes the present, and

always treats with a freshness of feeling what is offered him,
he always makes sure of something good; and, if he sometimes
does not succeed, has at least lost nothing. ;

“There is August Hagen, in Kénigsberg, a splendid talent: have you ever read his Olfried und Lisena? ‘There you may
find passages that could not be better; the situations on the
Baltic, and the other particulars of that locality, are all masterly.
But these are only fine passages; as a whole, it pleases nobody.
And what labour and power he has lavished upon it! indeed,
he has almost exhausted himself. Now, he has been writing a
tragedy.” Here Goethe smiled, and paused for a moment. I took
up the discourse, and said that, if I was not mistaken, he had
advised Hagen (in Kunst und Alierthum) to treat only small subjects. “TI did so, indeed,” he replied; “ but do people'conform to
the instructions of us old ones? Each thinks he must know best
about himself, and thus many are lost entirely, and many for
a long time go astray. Past is the time for blundering about
—that belonged to us old ones; and what was the use of all our
seeking and blundering, if you young people choose to go the
very Same way over again? In this way we can never get on
at all. Our errors were endured because we found ‘no beaten