

While all this was said, I stood looking at an engraving with
a lady at one of the tables, and could only lend half an ear
to Goethe’s words; but so much the deeper did they sink
into my mind.

After the company had gradually departed, and I was alone
with Goethe, who stood by the stove, I approached him.

“your excellency,” said I, “made an excellent remark a little
while ago, when you said that the Greeks co nature
With their own greatness. and I was
‘deeply penetrated with this maxim.”

“Yes,” said Goethe, “all depends on this: one must be something 
in order to do something. Dante seems to us great; but
€ culture of centuries behind him. The house of Rothschild
 is rich; but it has taken more than one generation to
accumulate such treasures, These things lie deeper than is
thought.

“Our worthy artists who imitate the old German school know
nothing of this; they imitate nature with their own weakness
and artistic incapacity, and fancy they are doing something.
They stand below nature: But whoever will produce anything
great must have so improved his culture that, like the Greeks,
he can elevate the trivial actualities of nature to the level of
his own mind, and really carry out what remains a mere intention
in natural phenoména—from either internal weakness or
external obstacles.”

Wednesday, October 22, 1828.
To-day at dinner we talked about ladies. “Women,” said
Goethe, “are silver dishes into which we put golden apples.
My idea of women is not abstracted from the phenomena. of
actual life; but has been born with me, or arisen in me, God
knows how. The female characters I have drawn have therefore 
all turned out well ; they are all better than could be
found in reality.” 

 Thursday, October 23, 1828.

Goethe spoke to-day with great respect of a little paper of
the Chancellor’s on the Grand Duke Charles Augustus; which
reviews, in short compass, the active life of this remarkable
prince. _ ;

“He has been very happy with this little work,” said Goethe;
“the materials are carefully gathered; all is animated by the
heartiest love, while at the same time the style is so close that