

which Nature has appointed for my daily work, I have permitted 
myself no repose or relaxation night or day; but have
always striven, investigated, and done as much, and that as
well, as I could. If everyone can say the same of himself, it
will prove well with all.”

“The fact is,” said I, by way of conciliation, “that you should
not be vexed at that reproach, but should rather feel flattered
at it. For what does it show, but that the opinion of the world
concerning you is so great, that it desires that he who has
done more for the culture of his nation than any other should
at last do everything!”

“T will not say what I think,” returned Goethe. “There is
more ill-will towards me hidden beneath that remark than you
are aware of. I feel therein a new form of the old hatred with
which people. have persecuted me and endeavoured quietly to
wound me for years. I know very well that I am an eyesore to
many; that they would all willingly get rid of me; and that,
since they cannot touch my talent, they aim at my character.
Now, it is said, I am proud; now, egotistical; now, full of envy
towards young talents; now, immersed in sensuality; now,
without Christianity; and now, without love for my native
country, and my own dear Germans. You have now known
me well for years, and you feel what all that talk is worth.
But if you would learn what I have suffered, read my Xenten;
and it will be clear to you, from my retorts, how people have
from time. to time sought to embitter my life.

“A German author is a German martyr! Yes, my friend,
you will not find it otherwise! And I myself can scarcely
complain; none of the others have fared better—most have
fared worse; and in England and France it is quite the same as
with us. What did not Moliére suffer? What Rousseau and
Voltaire? Byron was driven from England by evil tongues;
and would have fled to the end of the world, if an early death
had not delivered him from the Philistines and their hatred.

“And if it were only the narrow-minded masses that persecuted 
noble men! But no! one gifted man and one talent
persecutes another ; Platen scandalizes Helne-and Heine Platen,
and each seeks to make the other hateful 3 while the world is
wide enough for all to live and to let live 3 and everyone has
an enemy in his own talent, which gives him quite enough to do.

_ “To write military songs, and sit in a room! That forsooth
was my duty! To have written them in the bivouac, when the
horses at the enemy’s outposts are heard neighing at night,
would have been well enough; however, that was not my life
and not my business, but that of Theodore Kérner. His warsongs 
suit him perfectly. But to me, who am not of a warlike
nature, and who have no warlike sense, war-songs would have
been a mask fitting my face very badly.

“I have never affected anything in my poetry. I have
never uttered anything I have not experienced, which has not
urged me to production. I have only composed love-songs
when I have loved. How could I write songs of hatred without
hating! And, between ourselves, I did not hate the French,
although I thanked God that we were free from them. How
could I, to whom culture and barbarism alone are of importance,
hate a nation that is among the most cultivated of the earth,
to which I owe so great a part of my own cultivation?

“ Altogether,” continued Goethe, “national hatred is something 
peculiar. You will always find it strongest and most
violent where there is the lowest degree of culture. But there is
a degree where it vanishes altogether, and where a person stands
to a certain extent above nations, and feels the weal or woe ofq
a neighbouring people as if it had happened to his own. This
degree of culture was conformable to my nature,it and I had
become strengthened in it long before I had reached my
sixtieth year.”

Monday, March 15, 1830.

This evening, passed a short hour at Goethe’s. He spoke a
great deal of Jena, and of the arrangements and improvements
he had made in the different branches of the University.. For
chemistry, botany, and mineralogy, formerly treated only so
far as they belonged to pharmacy, he had introduced special
chairs. Above all, he had done much good for the museum
of natural history and the library. He again related to me,
with much self-satisfaction and good humour, the history of
his violent seizure of a room adjoining the library, of which
the medical faculty had taken possession, and which they,
would not give up.

“The library,” said he, “was in very bad condition. The
situation was damp and close, and by no means fit to contain
its treasures; particularly as, through the. purchase of. the
Biittner library on the part of the Grand Duke, thirteen thousand
additional volumes lay in large heaps upon the floor. An

1A statement that, however true, completely justifies the “‘persecutors”
he complained of. Goethe seems to have desired credit both for being
patriotic and for being superior to patriotism.