
himself is capable of doing; and as certain people have their
proper existence in the mediocre, they get a trick of thoroughly
depreciating in literature anything that, while faulty, may have
good points; so as to elevate the mediocre, which they praise,
to a greater eminence.”

We then spoke of the Theory of Colours, and of certain
German professors who continue to warn their pupils against
it as a great error.

“JT am sorry, for the sake of many a good scholar,” said
Goethe; “but, for myself, it is quite indifferent; my theory is
as old as the world, and cannot always be repudiated and
set aside.”

Goethe then told me that he was making good progress with
his new edition of the Metamorphosis of Plants, and Soret’s
translation—which was more and more felicitous.

“It will be a remarkable book,” said he, “as the most varied
elements are worked up into one whole. [have inserted passages
from some important young German naturalists; and it is
pleasing to see that such a good style has been formed among
the better writers in Germany, that we cannot tell whether
one or the other is speaking. However, the book gives me
more trouble than I expected; and I was at first led into the
undertaking almost) ainst myself—but something demonic
prevailed, which was not to be resisted.”

“you did well,” said I, “in yielding to such influences, for the
demonic seems to be so powerful, that it is sure to carry its
point at last.”

“Only,” replied Goethe, “man, in his turn, must endeavour
to carry his point against the Demonic; and in the present
case I must try by all industry and toil to make my book as
good as lies in my power, and as circumstances will allow. Such
matters are in the same predicament as the game which the
1 is decided by the dice

French call codille, where a great deal
which are thrown, but where it is left to the skill of the player
to place the men well on the board.”
Sunday, March 20, 1831.
Goethe told me at table that he had been lately reading
Daphnis and Chloe.

“The book,” said he, “is so beautiful, that, amid the bad
we cannot retain the impression

circumstances in which we live,
we receive from it, but are
it. The clearest day prevails in 1
shed anew every time we read
t, and we think we are looking

