
He who does not expect a million readers should not write a line. 

“For twenty years the public has been disputing which is
the greater, Schiller or I; and it ought to be glad that it has
got a couple of fellows about whom it can dispute.”

Goethe related to me that Preller had been with him, and
had taken leave, as he is going to spend some years in Italy.

“As a parting word,” said Goethe, “I counselled him not
to allow himself to be distracted, but to confine himself 
particularly to Poussin and Claude Lorraine, and above all to study
the works of these two great men—that he might plainly see
how they regarded Nature, and used her for the expression of
their artistic views and feelings. ;

“Preller is an important talent, and I have no fear for him.
He appears to me, besides, to be very earnest. T am almost
certain he will rather incline to Poussin than to Claude Lorraine;
still, I have particularly recommended him to study the latter
—and not without reason; for it is with the cultivation of an
artist as with the cultivation of every other talent. Our strong
points, to a certain extent, develop themselves ; but those
germs of our nature which are not in daily exercise, and are
therefore less powerful, need particular care, in order that they
also may become strong. So may a young singer, as I have
often said, possess certain natural tones that leave nothing to
be desired; while other tones in his voice may be found less
strong, clear, and full, But even these he must by constant
exercise seek to bring to equal perfection. ;

“T am certain Preller will one day succeed admirably in the
solemn, the grand, and perhaps also the wild. Whether he will
be equally happy in the cheerful, the graceful, and the lovely,
is another question; therefore have I especially recommended
to him Claude Lorraine, that by study he may acquire what
does not lie in the actual tendency of his nature. — ;

“There is one thing more to which I called his attention.
I have seen many of his studies from nature: they were excellent,
and executed with great energy and life; but they were all
isolated objects, of which little can afterwards be made when
it comes to individual inventions. I have advised him never
in future to.delineate an isolated object—such as single trees,
single heaps of stones, or single cottages—but always to add a
background and some surrounding objects.

“And for the following reasons. In nature we never see
anything isolated; everything is in connection with something
else which is before it, beside it, under it, and over it. A single
object may strike us as particularly picturesque: it is not, however, 
the object alone which produces this effect; it is the
connection in which we see it, with that which is beside, behind,
and above it—all of which contribute to that effect. Thus
during a walk I may see an oak, the picturesque effect of which
surprises me. But if I represent it alone, it will perhaps no
longer appear as it did, for want of that which contributed to
and enhanced the picturesque effect in nature. Thus, too, a
wood may appear beautiful through the influence of one particular sky, 
one particular light, and one particular situation
of the sun; but, if I omit all these in my drawing, it will perhaps
appear without force, and as something indifferent.

“‘Further; there is in nature nothing beautiful which is not
produced (motivirt) as true in conformity with the laws of
nature. In order that that truth .of nature may also appear
true in the picture, it must be accounted for by the introduction
of the influential circumstances.

“T find by a brook well-formed stones, the parts of which
exposed to the air are picturesquely covered with green moss.
Now it is not alone moisture which has caused this formation;
but perhaps also a northerly aspect, or the shade of trees and
bushes, have co-operated. If I omit these influential causes
in my picture, it will be without truth, and without the proper
convincing power.

“Thus, the situation of a tree, the kind of soil beneath it,
and other trees behind and beside it, have a great influence on
its formation. An oak standing exposed to the wind on the
western summit of a rocky hill will acquire a form quite different
from that of one growing in the moist ground of a sheltered
valley. Both may be beautiful in their kind; but they will have
a very different character, and can therefore, in an artistically
conceived landscape, only be used for such a situation as they
occupied in nature. So the delineation of surrounding objects,
by which any particular situation is expressed, is of high
importance to the artist. On the other hand, it would be
foolish to attempt to represent prosaic accidents that have had
as little influence upon the form of the principal objects as upon
its picturesque effect for the moment.