

fortnight after comes the black-headed one, or the monk
(Monch); then, a week afterwards, the nightingale; and quite
at the end of April or the beginning of May, the grey one.
All these birds moult in August with us, as well as the young
of the first brood ; wherefore, at the end of August, young monks
that have already black heads are caught. The young of the
last brood, however, migrate with their first feathers, and moult
later in the southern countries; for which reason young monks
caught at the beginning of September, especially young male
birds, have red heads like their mother.”

“Ts, then,” he asked, “the grey Gras-Miicke the latest bird
that returns to us, or are there others later?”

“The so-called yellow spott-vogel (mocking-bird), and- the
magnificent golden Pirol (yellow thrush),” said I, “do not appear
till about Whitsuntide. Both migrate in the middle of August,
after the breeding season, and moult with their young in the
south. If kept in cages, they moult with us in the winter; so
that they are very difficult to rear. They require much warmth,
yet if we hang them near the stove they pine from the want of
fresh air; while, if we place them near the window, they pine
in the cold of the long nights.”

“Tt is supposed, then,” said Goethe, “that moulting is a
disease, or at least is attended by bodily weakness?”

“T would not say that,” said I. “It is a state of increased

yr productiveness, which is gone through without difficulty in the

open air, and with robust birds perfectly well in a room. T have
had Gras-Miicken that have not ceased singing during their
moulting, a sign that they were thoroughly well. But if a
bird kept in a room appears at all sickly during its moulting,
it may be concluded that it has not been properly treated—with
respect to food, water, or fresh air. If a bird kept in a room
has grown so weak from want of air and freedom that it has not
the productive power to moult, and if it is then taken into the
fruitful fresh air, the moulting will go on as well as possible.
With a bird at liberty, it passes off so gently and gradually that
it is scarcely felt.”

“But, still, you just now seemed to hint that during their
moulting the Gras-Miicken retire into the depths of the
forest.”

“During that time,” said I, “they certainly need shelter;
and in this case Nature proceeds with such wisdom and moderation 
that a bird during its moulting never loses so many feathers
at once as to render it incapable of flying well enough to reach its
food. But it may still happen that it loses, for instance, at the
same time the fourth, fifth, and sixth principal feathers of the
left wing, and the fourth, fifth, and sixth feathers of the right
one; so that, although it can still fly very well, it cannot fly
well enough to escape from the pursuing birds of prey—especially 
the swift and active tree falcon—and then a bushy thicket
is very useful.”

“Good! But does the moulting take place in both wings
equally and symmetrically?”

“As far as my observation goes—yes; and that is ver
beneficial. For if a bird lost, for ay three principal
feathers from the left wing and not so many from the right
the wings would be without equilibrium, and the bird would
_ ms? Rage a over its movements. It would be like
a ship the sails of which are t 1
light (on the other.” oo heavy on one side and too

“T see,” said Goethe, “we may penetrate into Nature on
whatever side we please, and always come to some wisdom.”

We were meanwhile continually going uphill, and were now
on the edge of a pine wood. We came to a place where some
stones had been broken and lay in a heap. Goethe told the
coachman to stop, and begged me to alight and see if I could
discover any fossils. I found some shells, and also some broken
ammonites, which I handed to him when I again took my
seat. We drove on.

“ Always the old story,” said Goethe; ‘‘always the old bed
of the sea! Looking down from this height upon Weimar
and upon the numerous villages around, it appears wonderful
to think that there was a time when whales sported in the
broad valley below. And yet there was such a time—at least
it is highly probable. But the mew that flew over the sea
that then covered this mountain certainly never thought that
we two me drive here to-day. And who knows whether,
of years, the mew may not again fly over
We were now upon the height, and drove quickly along. On
our right were oaks, beeches, and other leafy trees: Weimar
was behind us, but out of sight. We had reached the western
height—the broad valley of the Unstrut, with many villages
and small towns, lay before us, in the clearest morning sun.

This is a good resting-place,” said Goethe. “TI think we
may as well try how a little breakfast would suit us in this
good air,”