

In constructing the Temple  they not only constructed the world; 
they also constructed cosmic time.

The construction of cosmic time through repetition of
the cosmogony is still more clearly brought out by the
symbolism of Brahmanic sacrifice. Each Brahmanic sacrifice 
marks a new Creation of the world (cf., for example,
Satapatha Brahmana, VI, 5, 1 ff.). Indeed, the construction
of the sacrificial altar is conceived as a “Creation of the
world.”” The water with which the clay is mixed is the
primordial water; the clay that forms the base of the altar
is the earth; the side walls represent the atmosphere.
Furthermore, each stage in the building of the altar is 
accompanied by verses in which the cosmic region that has
just been created is explicitly named (Satapatha Brahmana).

But if the raising of the altar imitates the cosmogonic act, 
the sacrifice proper has another end: to restore the primordial
unity, that which existed before the Creation. For Prajapati 
created the cosmos from his own substance; and
once he had given it forth, “‘he feared death” (X, 4, 2, 2)
and the gods brought him offerings to restore and revive
him. In just the same way, he who today celebrates the
sacrifice reproduces this primordial restoration of Prajapati. 
“Thus whosoever, knowing this, performs this holy
work, or he who but knows this [without practicing any
ritual] makes up this Prajapati whole and complete” (X,
4, 3, 24, etc.).“ The sacrificer’s conscious effort to
re-establish the primordial unity, that is, to restore the whole
that preceded the Creation, is a very important characteristic
of the Indian spirit with its thirst for primordial unity, 
but we cannot pause to consider it. Let it suffice that
we have found that, with every sacrifice, the Brahman
reactualizes the archetypal cosmogonic act, and that this
coincidence between the “mythical instant’’ and the “‘present 
moment” supposes both the abolition of profane time
and the continual regeneration of the world.

In effect, if ‘“Prajapati is the Year’’ (Aztareya Brahmana,
VII, 7, 2, etc.), “the Year is the same as Death; and whosoever 
knows this Year (to be) Death, his life that (year)
does not destroy .. .” ( Satapatha Brahmana, X, 4, 3,
1).4° The Vedic altar, to employ Paul Mus’ apt formula,
is time materialized. ““That fire-altar also is the Year,—
the nights are its enclosing stones, and there are three
hundred and sixty of these, because there are three hundred 
and sixty nights in the year; and the days are its
yagushmati bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty
of these, and three hundred and sixty days in the year”, 
five seasons are a year, and theyear is Agni (the altar). 

And that Prajapati who became  relaxed is the year; and those five bodily parts of his
which became relaxed are the seasons; for there are five
seasons, and five are those layers: when he builds up the
five layers, he thereby builds him up with the seasons . . .
And those five bodily parts of his, the seasons, which became 
relaxed, are the regions (or quarters; i.e., the four
cardinal points of the compass and the upper region); 