 TRACKING THE CHEMISTRY OF STRESS

In response to causes of stress, ranging from overwork and quarreling to loss of a job or
death in the family, chemical messages (1) are carried along neuron tracks in the outer
edge of the brain to the hypothalamus (2), stimulating the production of the chemical
CRF. Acting as a switching station, the hypothalamus sends the CRF and other chemical

Messengers down two tracks. The first track goes to the pituitary (3), where the chemical
freight is changed again, this time into the hormone ACTH. It enters the bloodstream
and travels on to the outer layer, or cortex, of the adrenal glands (5). Here ACTH
initiates the production of cortisol, a chemical that increases blood sugar and speeds up
the body’s metabolism. On the second track, messengers leave the hypothalamus and _
trigger electro-chemical impulses down the brain stem (6) and spinal cord (7), until the
signals reach the core of the adrenal glands (8). The result is a release of epinephrine _
(adrenaline), which helps supply extra glucose to serve as fuel for the muscles (9) and
brain, and norepinephrine, which speeds up the heartbeat and raises blood pressure.
Both tracks feed back to the pituitary (10) to regulate further the stress response. 

The Joy of Fear 97

Which helps supply glucose to the muscles and brain, and norepinephrine, 
which speeds up the heart rate and elevates blood pressure. 
Figure 3-2 illustrates the body’s chemical response to stress.
The psychological by-products of a moderate biochemical emergency 
are noticeable increments in one’s feelings of physical prowess
and personal competence, often associated with strong sensations of
pleasure. In many ways, the state of biological and psychological
“readiness” produced by stress is mimicked by the effects of stimulant drugs. 
People may self-induce similar alterations of consciousness with amphetamine, 
cocaine, or caffeine (two and half cups of coffee will double the level of 
epinephrine in the blood); or in activities that appear 
to be life threatening experiences—falling in love, riding a roller coaster, or watching a great
theatrical performance—can evoke the same stress hormones as more
troublesome flirtations with danger or drugs. Selye, who is regarded
many as the grandfather of all modern stress research, has been
acutely aware of the intoxicating correlates of fight or flight reactions. 
He points to stress-drunkenness as causing more overall harm
to society than the universally acclaimed demon of demons, alcohol.
What is even more incredible than this seemingly outrageous
claim by Selye is that much of the “stress-drunkenness” is 
deliberately self-induced. “Skydiving is the most fun you can have with
our clothes on,” proclaims Robin Heid, who dives not only from
buildings but from smokestacks, mountain cliffs, airplanes, and
bridges. “The greatest joy is being in such a dangerous situation that
you nearly wet your pants,” says a private detective who purposely
seeks out dangerous assignments for thrills. Eric, a young man in his
early twenties, goes to the most savage, bloodthirsty movies in town
because he “loves to be scared.” These seemingly outrageous utterances 
can be repeated many times over by “adrenaline junkies” who
ire addicted to a wide variety of risk-taking activities.
What is so attractive about risk taking and fear-inducing situations? 
In terms of brain chemistry, the symptomatic adventurer
seeks the same mind-altering escape from depression, stress, or fear
of nonbeing as the user of powerful stimulant drugs. Whether
through skydiving, gambling, or cocaine, self-induced changes in

Neurotransmission may well lead to the familiar path of compulsion,
loss of control, and continuation in spite of harmful consequences.
In order to explain the biochemical progression of stress-hormone
