OrDINARY ACTION IN THE BRAIN

Typically, cells communicate with chemicals called neurotransmitters.
The supply of the transmitters is kept in balance by the ability of the
transmitting cell to reabsorb—scientifically called “reuptake”—some of the
chemical in the synaptic cleft would turn the motor on. 

Introduction of man-made chemicals that
block certain receptor sites is the basis for the chemical treatment of
schizophrenia. A drug (for example, Haldol) occupies receptor sites
on the postsynaptic membrane, normally occupied by the neurotransmitter 
dopamine. The electrical balance of the cell membrane
remains intact, and the impulse cannot be transferred to adjacent
cells. This reduces the overactive neurotransmission usually associated 
with schizophrenia. When an impulse has been transmitted to the 
postsynaptic neuron, the electrical balance of that neuron must be restored before it
can receive the next impulse. This balance is restored through the
release of neurotransmitters from the postsynaptic receptor sites.


 COCAINE IN THE BRAIN

Cocaine slips into the reuptake pump inhibiting its ability to balance the
amount of neurotransmitter traveling between cells. ‘I his can result in an
overstimulation of the receiving cell. Some have linked that interaction to
overstimulation of the receiving euphoria.

Source: Scientific American. The New York Times, March 22, 1983.

 Re-leased neurotransmitters may be reabsorbed and safely stored in the
synaptic vesicles of the presynaptic terminal, where they are protected 
from destruction and may be reused as needed. However, a
number of interesting things can happen to the neurotransmitters
before they reach the safe hiding place of the synaptic vesicle. If
cocaine is ingested, this tends to prevent the neurotransmitters from
being recycled into the presynaptic terminal, resulting in an excess.
of neurotransmitters in the synapse. Since more neurotransmitters
ne Ie Tor attachment to receptor sites, more receptor sites will
be occupied, with a resultant increase in the rate of neurotransmission and thus the State of arousal. This, of course, is why the individual ingested cocaine in the first place.