all of a sudden, the twentieth century in Europe did begin with what
hits been heralded as a vast movement of mind, a revolution of manners and
means as well as consciousness. Freud published The Interpretation of
Dreams in 1900. Jung later said, looking back on his first reading of that seminal 
work, “I never had an idea until then.” He promptly got in touch with the
author of those new thoughts; they met together in a hotel soon thereafter
and proceeded to talk up a storm. Out of that meeting and the new organization 
of psychoanalysis came the broadened depth psychology that has so affected 
human consciousness (and still has a long way to go!). Psychoanalysis
in those days can itself be accused of a certain narcissism in its elevation 
of its own ideas of the unconscious—a seething mass of sexual and violent impulses,
 yet held captive in a freezing darkness —to universal status.

Freud capitalized Sex and Jung capitalized Symbol; Freud emphasized the personally
repressed and Jung emphasized the ancestral and collective unconscious
peopled with archetypal images. Psychoanalysis was in part a radical erifiqne
of Western culture, expressed most concisely and trenchantly by Freud himself
 in his monograph Civilization and Its Discontents, and elaborated by
Jung in his concept of the reality of evil and the explosive threat of the shadow
ma science and technology only dimly aware of its negative potentials.

A big century of creativity was on the move in the West. The 20th Century Limited, the newest and fastest train in the world, was its symbol. There
was a broadening of consciousness and human enterprise in quite a number
of unexampled ways. In 1904 the mathematical physicist Poincaré called for
a special theory of relativity, and in 1905 the young Einstein obliged. The
imaginable cosmos took on a new dimension, space-time, with hints of others
 still to come. The archetypes, those forms from the ancestral memory.
were coming into their own, that is, were becoming widely recognized in
popular psychology and literature. Yet in the twentieth century they were 
taking on some new and powerful embodiments. In 1902 the Wright brothers
were setting sail for the moon, and soon enough for Jupiter, from Kitty Hawk
(surely an archetypal place-name for take-off, with its hint of claws and beak
and predatory swoop, as well as of the fledgling bird testing its wings). Henry
lord was just starting to clog the highways of America, most of which hadn’t
yet been built, with his tin lizzie (soon to become a tank to shoot from). “Soon”
is a key word for the twentieth century; soon or sooner, the century of speed.

THE NEw QUEST FOR FREEDOM:
WoMEN FREEING THEMSELVES

Virginia Woolf proclaimed the need for “a room of one’s own,” imagining in
a moving, personal way the plight of a forever-to-be-unknown female Shakespeare, 
perhaps sister of the man we know by that name. More and more
women did find that priceless freedom that comes with privacy as the century
wore on, and in our own compilation we began to find many women’s voices,
as you shall see. The oppressed were beginning to speak out, in ways that had
been denied them. Women had through the ages been creative in traditionally 
restricted ways: the making of homes, the bearing and bringing up of
families, the forming and fostering of humane relationships and personal values, 
the growing and preparation of the fruits of the earth. But now their denied 
faculties of scientific and=mathematical and artistic thought were
finding expression. Virginia Woolf had seen a key issue, privacy and time to
oneself, but even more important perhaps was the self-definition and social
acceptance of women who chose not to spend their energy on raising a family 
but on doing other things with their means. Often enough this meant
some simple acknowledgment and change of fact: The “man of the house”
had to take his turn at cooking the meals, doing the dishes, changing the 
diapers when that was called for, just as a matter of recognized co-responsibility.
A decisive moment in women’s freeing of themselves from bondage
came in 1920 in the United States with the passage by Congress and 
ratification by the states of the Nineteenth Amendment, recognizing 
the right of women to vote. This was brought about by the thousands 
of women who organized themselves to make the fight that their menfolk 
wouldn’t or couldn’t make. They suffered outrageous physical and mental 
abuse from the male authorities, but it only stiffened their resolve. 
(Incidentally, the final and decisive vote cast for ratification was that of a Tennessee assemblyman who had already voted no, in the morning. That very afternoon he received, fortuitously, a letter from his aged mother in rural Tennessee, saying, “I know
you're a good boy and will vote what you know is right—Yes!” He immediately changed his vote. There is more than one way to skin a cat.)