In a related experiment, when participants were evaluated by
another person, their evaluation of that other was strongly influenced
by the way in which they had been evaluated by him or her.?!

Reciprocity appears to be important in the area of self-disclosure,
Generally, people are more likely to like and feel intimacy toward
others who are willing to show themselves as they really are. When we
bare ourselves to another, we usually expect that person to do the same,
If someone does not, we feel uncomfortable and less attracted to him
or her.

The findings on reciprocity show that one tends to get back what one
gives. People who exploit others are usually recognized as exploitative,
sooner or later, and then others react to them in kind or just start to
shun them. In the long run, exploitation is probably not in your ow
self-interest in a relationship, even if you take a selfish point of view,
because when you are eventually found out, you will likely get back
what you gave. Of course, the Golden Rule may work on the average,
but it does not necessarily work in individual cases. Some people take
and give nothing in return. Others are able to give but reluctant to take.


Do “birds of a feather flock together”? Yes.

Similarity can take many forms, several of which increase interpersonal
attraction, in general, and intimacy, in particular. Demographic
variables matter: Similarity in age, religion, education, physical health,
ethnic background, economic background, and self-esteem increase 
interpersonal attraction.?* People who are attracted to and who feel 
intimate toward each other also tend to have similar personalities, and
having similar personalities is associated with marital satisfaction,"
Attracted couples are also more likely to be similar in attitudes that)
are unattracted ones. As noted earlier, couples in ongoing relation
ships are also more likely to be similar in physical attractiveness that
are couples matched in age but not in physical attractiveness.

In one set of studies, participants, generally college students, start 
by answering questionnaire items intended to measure their personal
ity attributes and attitudes.3© The participants are then shown the
questionnaire of another individual whom they have not met. Unbeknownst to them, 
the unknown participant is a phony, and his or her responses have been 
manipulated so as to be either similar or dissimilar to those of the genuine participant. 
The genuine participant is left to form a general impression of the other 
person and to rate him or her an Interpersonal Judgment Scale. The scale contains several items,
two of which are critical: One regards personal feelings toward the unknown other, 
and the other regards the participant’s willingness to work with the other in an experiment. 
Ratings on these two items, out together, are considered to be a measure of attraction 
toward the other. Scores on the Interpersonal Judgment Scale are predicted
y the amount of similarity between the participant’s and the phony
her’s patterns of responses. In particular, similarity in attitude is an
excellent predictor of attraction as measured by the scale.

Why does similarity matter for attraction? Consider four reasons.
First, people may find similarity to be rewarding to them, in and of it.
If, Second, similarity may increase self-esteem: Hearing someone 
express similar attitudes or values may enhance your view of yourself, as
though similarity you may receive support for the positions you take
fe. Third, similarity may portend a bright future: People may have
eater confidence in the future of a relationship with someone who is
ore rather than less similar to them. Finally, it may be that it is not
{ similarity in demographics or attitudes or whatever that directly
silences interpersonal attraction, but also the similarity in emotional
responses thereby generated. In other words, people who are similar in
variety of ways may respond to various situations in an emotionally
congruent manner and therefore be more likely to be attracted to each
Sometimes, similarity of attitudes can matter in a rather perversely. 
For example, it has been found that individuals who possess negative 
self-concepts, or images of themselves, tend to be more commit-
to marital partners who evaluate them negatively than to partners
evaluate them positively. In contrast, people with positive self-
concepts prefer to stay with those who evaluate them positively.>® The
somewhat depressing conclusion of this research is that, if you are try-
I to bolster someone with a low self-concept, they are likely to dump
ui before they dump their negative self-concept!