
Why did MUD1 do it this way? It looks suspiciously like the way that Dungeons &
Dragons combat works—so similar that many virtual worlds openly refer to charaacter
health as “hit points,” in the D&D tradition.

MUD] did it this way because it delivered the gameplay. Roy wanted combat to pro
ceed as exchanges of blows—I swing, you swing, I swing, you swing—because that
was the most appropriate level of abstraction. He wanted it automated because other
wise it would have been tedious for players continually to type “hit them>*.” When
character swings at another character, there has to be some chance of hitting: This 
encapsulated by the dexterity attribute. As for what to do when a hit got through, while
obviously there had to be some damage.

Roy and I discussed how to handle this. Although I knew the D&D combat system
well, I also knew other ways to do this kind of thing (I didn’t only play D&D, after all

Come to that, Pd already designed board games and a computer game*”’ that used
different mechanisms. Overall, though, the classic approach won on the basis of simplicity. 
When you're in a fight, you want an instant readout on how well you're doing,
Anything too complicated wouldn't give players enough time to absorb it: anything
much simpler and combat wouldn't have been any fun.

We decided, therefore, to give characters a number of “lives.” Whenever a character
was hit successfully, one life would be removed. To make this less predictable than it
sounds, we scaled up everything by a factor of ten and added some randomness. Thus,
ulthough your character could usually survive ten blows, sometimes they’d hold out
lor longer and sometimes they’d capitulate sooner. We did some tuning to make sure
hat battles neither ground on too slowly nor ended too quickly to be fun, and that was
hat. Everything else—spells, weapons, artifa¢ts—followed.

As a game mechanic, this worked well. As a representation of reality, it was somewhat
off the mark. Real-life combat with hand weapons is not a gradual wearing down, a cut
here, a nick there, until eventually someone dies of attrition. Instead, most blows are
locked, dodged, or parried, and when one does finally land it either has little effect or

6, Note that clicking a mouse is much easier than typing, which is why graphical virtual worlds can get away
with non-automatic hand-to-hand combat.

‘7. A two-player tank warfare game in BASIC which is now lost to the world (not that the world should be bothered about this!), It used a target location approach, whereby each hit could knock out a system or crew
member, reducing the options that the player had for their subsequent commands,

Life in the Virtual World pretty well incapacitates the recipient. In real-world warfare,
once suffering a telling wound they could take no further part in the battle were 
certain to die even if no one finished them off (medical science couldnt deal is 
infection). Virtual worlds set in different periods or having some kind bed magic
be able in them don’t have to stick with these facts, of course, but they still need a fiction
to rationalize it.

So what other combat systems are available that retain the gameplay but make more
rational sense?

Enhanced Combat Systems

Actually, the MUD1-style approach does make some sense if, instead of stamina/health
hit points, armor/shield is used. You bash at people until their armor comes to er
then the next blow hits their body and they've lost. Where characters injuries ine
heal with rest after a fight, “wounded” armor is repaired. Of course, to be realistic
some hits should possibly get through despite the armor, but even so they might not
do fatal damage, yet fatigue can set in and...blah blah blah.

Combat systems can rapidly get very complex. However, the same approaches crop u
time and time again, not only in virtual worlds but also in single-player and tabletop
games. Here’s a run-down:

Reaction and recovery times. Traditional combat is round-based, in that characters
trade blows either in turn or simultaneously. This is unrealistic, because we
weapons take longer to recover from than others. In the time it takes you to a
your two-handed sword, I might have been able to run through twice his
my rapier. Defense also can have reaction and recovery times: Your hd s “ :
may take more damage, but if I switch the point of my attack you might no
able to bring it into play before I strike.

One-off attacks. Instead of having fights proceed automatically after the first block
has been struck, each one must be performed manually. If I throw my axe at
you, I can hardly do so round after round anyway—its a one-off attack. Special
boosted attacks (such as stunning punches or called shots) are usually treated
as one-offs.