
White’s complaint’? is that the commands used in MOOs to obtain information
about other players suggest a surveillant attitude and use voyeuristic terminology
watch,” “scope,” “glance,” “peep,” “gawk,” “examine,” and so on). The “look” com-
wind itself, with the third-person messages it triggers, is worst of all; frequently, new
are distressed when they are continually looked at by other players. The concept
I “gaze” is important in feminist theories, because implicit in it is a communication
between the gazer and the gazee. MOOs unequivocally empower the gazer: Gazing is
‘live: self-image is passive. In other words, you describe yourself for the benefit of the
person who looks, not for the benefit of yourself. This limits the identity constructs that
can create, which is bad for everyone no matter what gender they are playing.

I have some sympathy with White's position. In my own virtual worlds, players don’t
jet to describe their characters—I believe that allowing it anchors character development 
too much. On the other hand, looking at a character is permitted (it concocts a
hviel description based on their tangible properties), along with large numbers of other
commands that have characters as their objects (including “hit”). Although White hersell doesn’t argue this, anyone willing to construe such commands as empowering
ihose who issue them at the expense of those against whom they are issued would surmise that virtual worlds (even graphical ones) were less than ideal. Quite how to
implement these kinds of commands some other way is non-obvious, too. That said,
virtual worlds are still much better than the real one in this respect, because at least
The “empowering” actions are open to anyone.

Returning to the issue of how cross-gender play undermines attempts to set Up female 
only virtual communities, it could be that the problem might be worse in theory than
in practice; it depends on the actual incidence of cross-gender play. If far fewer men
play as female characters than anecdotal evidence suggests, the effects of their presence
might amount to mere background noise. It would therefore be very useful if empirical
evidence existed to show how widespread cross-gender playing really is. At a more
general level, it would also be very nice to know if the predictions as to why people
play across gender are in fact accurate.

I know of two studies that have attempted to answer these questions”.

150, Michele White, Visual Pleasure in Textual Places: Gazing in Multi-User Object-Oriented Worlds. Eileen Green
and Alison Adam, Virtual Gender ‘Terminology, Consumption and Identity. New York, Routledge, 2001.

gi oy mane (hat don't nom about