

> Hint at what is to come. to a snowfield there’s a Jarring of expectations, 
you investigate, or do you get out before anythiy
ual changes can serve to label areas: The more 94
spiky the inhabitants?”. The same technique can
blacksmith’s hammer breaks, you get a new on
though, the replacement hammer changes its
and makes a noise different to that of regular
unknown: Do you explore it, or shy away?

> Facilitate various social activities.

» Make a philosophical or ethical point. (This may or may not be in combination ,
with any of the above.)

Some obvious ways to suggest atmosphere are

> Open versus closed form. Cramped areas restrict choice, wide areas open it up;
dungeons are more oppressive than wilderness. When players enter a very nar
passage or descend underground stairs, they know their options are being limited
if they continue, it symbolizes their readiness to accept the danger. When player:
enter a vast plain, they know their options are maximized; if they continue, it _
symbolizes their readiness to accept responsibility.

» Ease versus difficulty. In the big city, you're ask di
town, you're asked to kill bandits. Can you stand I
the kitchen? By giving players harder quests in au
them that these are tougher areas. If some NPC yah
vampires and you refuse, you've nevertheless been
place where there are nests of vampires. If you jo 4

you can’t say you weren't warned. The quests wet as
heed.

» Lightness versus darkness. The less you know, the more easily you're spooked, Th
same applies to other sensory information that the virtual world supplies: Sudd

Large versus small. Big monsters are strong monster
NPCs. Smaller monsters can be dominated; sim
sters may be fast, poisonous, or otherwise awkwa
power. An impression of size can send potent, prin
why real-world animals such as cats will try to 1m
facing off an opponent.

of whatever awaits them. If they see light at the end of the tunnel, it tells them —
their ordeals are nearing their end.

learn—but the more you fear you won't like what you discover. A passageway —
that has a number of short, sharp turns increases the sense of urgency; a long,
straight passageway reduces it**. On the other hand, a vista can symbolize the d
tance of goals: You merge from the trees to see a vast tract of open country, of
the far horizon of which you can just make out the spires of the City of Brong
The designer is showing you what you'll have to go through to get there: By pr
ceeding, you're reaffirming your goal.

» Beauty versus ugliness. Breathtaking panoramas and

feelings of awe and wonder. Misshapen creatures I i
an otherwise normal situation seem unpleasant,
ness failure; beauty goodness, ugliness evil, It ope 4
superficially beautiful can be ugly deep down, an “4
remains the same. This is one area where the p
assume beauty to be indicative of goodness, salety,

the designer just wants to make their world look hi

worlds. Y

> Familiarity versus alienness. A sudden change of terrain or architecture can ind
either relief or a sense of unease. The more sudden the change, the greater th
impact. This may look like a regular Middle Eastern bazaar, but when it gives I

————— i

17 MUDI1 used time as a metaphor for danger. The more CONLEM POAT
wifer it was, The really dangerous places were flagged by their great a

phere that players were immediately able to pick up on (even thaw
explicitly). Ps

36. Textual worlds can use long and short descriptions to achieve this kind of pacing, too. Ifa room hag a
minimal description, it takes less time to read it; you therefore leave for the next room quicker, which. “
the tempo even if you're actually only traveling in a straight line,