Interestingly, her own experience reads very much like the hero’s journey.

Mikael Cardell, 199429. In this early attempt to look at virtual worlds from the
point of view of literary theory, Cardell compares the processes involved in the
construction of virtual worlds with those of a literary world (that of Lord of the
Rings) and concludes that they are fundamentally the same. Nevertheless, altho
virtual worlds are used as locations for storytelling—quests in particular—he se
little evidence of contextual role-playing in most of them except for social 
experimentation (for example, cross-gender play).

Role-Playing Game Theory

Role-playing gamers have theories of role-play, Acti "
course, but players of role-playing games (RPGs) do ii
ate to their particular circumstances. Instead, they've 1h
origins of which lie in the discussions of role-playing
Phil Goetz, 19942. This is a classic article that shows how 
virtual worlds can b rec.games.frp.advocacy. Most of this work was done Wit
games, whether face-to-face or live action; nevertheless
virtual worlds (and to single-player computer role players

(here are two key aspects to the theories: mode and sf

Mode is the style of play that players adopt, and concert
in role-playing games. The usual answer they gives”
ers of virtual worlds reply. The RPG categorization ol 1
the one I derived for virtual world player types, In tie
The GDS and GNS models, named after the initial let
Dramatist, Simulationist, and Gamism, Narrativisim, Wi

Catherine Wylie, 1999°°!. In this paper, Wylie argues that virtual worlds are the nati
ral successors of the ancient “memory theatre” approach to storytelling, where st
ries were told aloud rather than being written down. Such stories evolved in the
telling, as the storyteller and listeners engaged in a dialogue. She sees virtual world
as offering the same opportunity for their communities to direct the moral tide,
which are unavailable in other common examples of post-modernism in action,

Torill Mortensen, 200232, Mortensen’s concern is that literary theorists have diffi
culty understanding virtual worlds because they are removed from them, they
speak with experience of literature, but not of virtual worlds. She suggests that
instead of looking at virtual worlds remotely, researchers should roll up their
sleeves and agtually play them?°3. Only through such ethnography-like fieldwork

is described in the rec.games.frp.advocacy FAQ™, GN!
I'll outline GNS here:

» Game mode. This concerns competition betwee
ters. Players create victory/loss conditions lor I

Mikael Cardell, Computers, Storytelling and World Creation: The Reader as Writer in Multi-Participant
Interactive Fiction. Department of Language and Literature, Linképing University, 1994.
http: //www.hack. org/~me/writings/world2.txt.

their playing strategies.

» Narrative mode. Here, the idea is the creation o
Characters are protagonists, and the referee i
which the players cut the story. The GDS model

Phil Goetz, Literary Role-Play in Cyberspace. Andrew Rilstone (editor), Interactive Fantasy 4. London,
Hogshead Publishing, 1995. http: //www.mud.co.uk/richard/ifan295.htm.

Catherine Wylie, MUDs, Memories and Morals: A Revisioning of Primary Orality and Late Literacy. Denvel.
University, 1999. 5
404, John H. Kim, The rec.games.frp.advocacy FAQ, http) / / www.

Torill Mortensen, Playing with Players: Potential Methodologies for MUDs. Game Studies Vol. 2 (1), July
faq vil/faql.art.

2002. http: //www.gamestudies. org/0102/mortensen/,
405, Ron Edwards, GNS and Other Matters of Role-Playing Theaty ?

A tiny minority of literary theorists do have meaningful experience of virtual worlds, of course, Aarseth
Indie-rpgs,com/articles/1/,

being the most notable example,