 My advice when deciding  what skill set is to consider what message it sends to players. 
I’ve seen designs for virtual worlds that have a weapons skill tree 
five levels deep, yet which had a single “mining” Jill that worked as 
well for iron as it did for diamonds. The message they were send-
» was, “This virtual world is all about combat.” Similarly,
I've  seen designs that covered the minutiae of everyday life, 
with skills covering everything from corn-planting
calligraphy to bee-keeping to savoir-faire'*. The message here was, 
“Nothing is all ill system for crafting, weapon use, spells, and 
everything else (i, Speaking Elvish) doesn’t mean they can’t be 
radically different I however, it also doesn’t mean that the problems 
of deciding what I way.

Of the many different crafting skills, weapon skills, spells, and general a virtual world offers, a handful will be so essential that everyone his
secondary skills that people have because they had to choose a
handful will be utterly useless. In a Wild West world, for example :
ctively like building unusual characters are going to pass on
that Important.”

If you want crafting to be a viable career, the skill tree for crafting 
should be deep enough for people to take it seriously. If you want people 
to travel a lot, include several skills that make traveling easier. If you 
think players will want to play bardic characters, include bardic skills.
If you don’t want to attract sneaky-thievy characters, don’t
have sneaky-thievy skills. Rate each skill for its attractiveness to 
various player types; if any types are over- or under-represented, adjust accordingly. 
If you fear spreadsheet abusers, make key skills mutually exclusive (but be 
aware that this will create a dread by all players to be essential, all characters 
should be given it  don’t usually have a “walk” skill, because it’s a skill everyone cat
e. As a rule of thumb, if any one skill is adopted by more than 90%,
-y all ought to get it. Similarly, if a skill is unused it should also be I
(or derived from attributes)—it costs nothing to do so, and it mea ,
s should be of roughly equal value to players. Of course, it may be I
ll this you find that a new handful of must-have skills a If
r repeat the exercise or split the skills into disjoint sub-skills.


Although the number of skills of a particular kind available to characters 
is one way to send players a message, it's not alone. In general, skills 
should be of roughly the same level of abstraction as one other. If in one 
area they are represented in greater detail than in others, this also can 
point to an increased sense of importance. Were the “swordplay” skill to be 
described in terms of how much it increases the damage done, critical hit 
percentages, weapon recovery time, parrying capability, and resistance to
being disarmed, this would give it more significance than a “lumberjack” 
skill defined solely in terms of how quickly you can fell a tree. 
Crediting skills with a false sense of importance this way is a particular 
example of selective depth, a trap that often ensnares
to hardwire a universal skill once it’s been identified (assuming your
virtual world leaves beta test).

As with objects, skills don’t have to have a tangible purpose. 
If characters need an “interior decoration” skill to change the wallpaper 
in their houses, then if they want to change the way their house looks 
they can either acquire this skill themselves or go to
someone who has already acquired it. 