

“That same sound speculation, in fact, forms the basis of my suggestion, 
my invitation. That is nowadays an extremely piquant means of provoking 
curiosity, of challenging the audience’s good manners, its open-mindedness, 
its snobisme—all the more piquant the less the artist denies the stamp 
of his nationality, his Germanness, the more he provides occasion for the cry, 
‘Ah, ¢a cest bien allemand, par exemple!’ For you do that, cher Maitre, pourquot
pas le dire? You give them occasion to do so at every step—not so
much at the beginning, in the days of cette ‘Phosphorescence de la mer
and your comic opera, but later on, more and more with every work.

You are sure to be thinking that what I have in mind is your fierce discipline, 
et que vous enchainez votre art dans un systeme de régles inexorables et néoclassiques, 
that you force your art to move in those iron chains—if not with grace, then with 
intelligence and boldness. But if that is the sort of thing I mean when speaking 
of your qualité d’Allemand, at the same time I mean more than that. I mean—how shall 1
put it?—a certain squareness, rhythmic ponderousness, immobility,
grossiéreté, that are venerably German—en effet, entre nous, one finds
them in Bach as well. Will you take offense at my critique? Non, j’en
suis sar! You are too great for that. Your themes—they almost always
consist of even values, of half, quarter, eighth notes; they are syncopated and 
tied, to be sure, but nonetheless persevere in what is often a
machinelike, stamping, hammering inflexibility and inelegance. C’est
‘boche’ dans un degré fascinant. Do not think I am finding fault with it!
It is simply énormément caractéristique, and that same note is indispensable 
for the series of concerts of international music that 1 am
arranging.

“You see, I am spreading my magic cloak. I want to take you to
Arte Quartet Irom Drusseis. “What’s this I hear? You don’t conduct? 
You won’t do it? And you don’t want to be a pianist, either? You refuse to 
accompany your own songs? I understand. Cher Maitre, je vous comprends a 
demi mot! It is not your habit to linger over something already completed. 
For you the composition of a work is its performance, it is finished once it is
written down. You will not play it, you will not conduct it, for then
you would immediately change it, break it up into variants and variations, 
develop it farther, and perhaps destroy it. How well I understand! Mais c’est 
dommage, pourtant. The concerts will suffer a definite
loss of personal appeal. Ah, pah—we’ll manage in any case! We shall
search for an interpreter aniong world-famous conductors—and we
won’t have to search for long! The permanent accompanist of Madame
de Strozzi-Pecié will take over the songs, and if you, Maitre, will simply 
come along, simply be there to show yourself to the public, nothing will 
be lost and everything gained.

“That is, of course, the condition—ah, non! you dare not hand your
works over to me for performance in absentia! Your personal appearance 
is imperative, particuliérement a Paris, where one’s musical fame
‘5 made in three or four salons. What does it cost to say a few times,
‘Tout le monde sait, madame, que votre jugement musical est infaillible’?
 It costs you nothing, and you will even find considerable amusement in it. 
As social events, my concerts rank second only to the
premieres of Monsieur Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes—if they do rank second. 

You will be invited out every evening. Nothing is more difficult,
artist, however, nothing is easier—even if he is only in the initial stages
of fame, the scandalous subject of a great deal of talk. Curiosity lowers
every barriére, it puts to rout every sort of exclusivity.