
retrace their steps; the Indo-Europeans, Goths, and Vandals chose
to settle and change their way of life.

In order to successfully accomplish this transition from nomadic 
banditry to settled urban life with an agricultural base, the
Indo-Europeans had to radically transform their religious practice,
their economic forms, and their social structures. The central 
figure of this radical transformation is Hermes. Hermes is the figure
who transforms cattle theft, law, and government. 

In addition, he becomes the patron of commerce and communication
 progress, art, and science. Not unrelatedly, he also
is honored as the Bringer of Dreams and the Guide of the soul to
the Land of the Dead.

His mythos is most instructive. His lineage is traceable back
into the pre-historic worship of the Great Goddess where he first
appears as an archetype of masculinity in the form of the “Lord of
the Animals.’’ When sheep, goats and cattle are domesticated in
the Pelasgian period, his role transforms into ‘Guardian of the
Animals.”’ In this guise, he is clearly a progenitor of the image of
Christ as Good Shepherd, particularly those representations
typal stance identical with the Pelasgian Hermes.

Despite this clear and ancient lineage, Hermes is also said to
have been born of the nymph Maia by Zeus. It is interesting to
note that the month of May was first named for Maia, who is also
know as ‘‘wise one,”’ “grandmother,” and ‘‘midwife.’’ Her festival
 was the Festival of the Flowers, usually held on May 1. This
ritual still survives in the Catholic practice of dedicating May 1
to Mary in her guise as ‘‘Mistress of Spring” and ‘‘Queen of the
Flowers.”” Here we see clear evidence that Maia embodies the
same aspects of the Great Mother archetype which are later 
embodied in the figure of Mary, just as Maia’s son Hermes embodies
an earlier manifestation of archetypal energy later embodied by
Mary’s son, Jesus.

In these versions of his myth, Hermes is clearly an exemplar
of both the Divine Child and the Trickster. Hermes is able to
speak, plan mischief, and carry it out the moment he is born. The
day of his birth he steals several of Apollo’s divine cattle, 
slaughters them and eats them. Apollo returns from his ritual task of
regulating the passage of the sun through the heavens only to 
discover that someone has had the audacity to steal his cattle. (It
should be remembered that cattle theft was a way of life for the
Indo-Europeans. The ancient poems show clearly that they stole
cattle from their neighbors whenever they believed they could get
away with it, even if the season before they had all been allies in
battle. In stealing Apollo’s cattle, Hermes is unusual only because
of his extreme youth.)

Apollo seeks everywhere for clues to the lost cattle. 
Like Demeter seeking for her lost daughter Persephone 
under similar circumstances, Apollo has little luck 
finding out what has happened until the birds tell him that 
the cattle were stolen by the infant Hermes. At first Apollo 
refuses to believe that one so young
could have accomplished such a raid, but when he goes to the
cave where Maia is recovering from the labor of childbirth, he
discovers the child amidst the dismembered carcasses of the cattle, 
blood-smeared and bloated_and_playing—with—the—entrails.

Apollo is enraged and seizes the child, carrying him up to 
Olympus to face the wrath and judgment of Zeus.
On the journey up the mountain, Hermes continues to play
with the remains of the cattle. He takes a skull and strings pieces
of intestine between the horns. When he completes his grisly construction, 
it emits odd tones and harmonies. Apollo notices this
strange contraption and grabs it away from the infant to inspect it
more closely. Hermes innocently says that Apollo may keep the
skull and points out how the strings of intestine may be plucked to
produce musical tones and sequences. This is, in fact, the first
lyre, which Hermes has invented while they traveled up the
mountain. When they arrive before Zeus’ throne of judgment,
Apollo makes his accusations and demands that Hermes be forced 7
to pay with his life for the theft of the sacred cattle of the sun. K, Rey
At this point, Hermes speaks up in his own defense, pointing, S<», Fear.
out that Apollo has already accepted a present made from the very a %
remains of the cattle he claims were stolen. Hermes suggests that APE s
since Apollo accepted the lyre, there is no theft involved, only s * vee
commerce—acceptable payment for goods received. 

Zeus is greatly amused and throws the case out of court. 
Apollo is annoyed, but says that the lyre is his now, and he will be the patron
of music and song, not Hermes.
In this story we can clearly see a mythological justification for