The grass was dense and soft, with the peculiar
beauty it gains when the cold days come and the
 gossamers lie on it in the morning; the dew is 
thick and lasting. The tomato vines had
blackened and the red globes had burst.

He had seen Madeleine at the back window upstairs, putting June
down for her nap, and later he heard the bath being run. Now she
was calling from the kitchen door. A gust from the lake made the
framed glass tremble in Herzog’s arms. He propped it carefully
against the porch and took off his canvas gloves but not his beret,
as though he sensed that he would immediately go on a trip.

Madeleine hated her father violently, but it was not irrelevant that
the old man was a famous impresario—sometimes called the American 
Stanislavsky. She had prepared the event with a certain theatrical 
genius of her own. She wore black stockings, high heels, a lavender
dress with Indian brocade from Central America. She had on her opal
earrings, her bracelets, and she was perfumed; her hair was combed
with a new, clean part and her large eyelids shone with a bluish cosmetic. 
Her eyes were blue but the depth of the color was curiously
affected by the variable tinge of the whites. Her nose, which descended 
in a straight elegant line from her brows, worked slightly
when she was peculiarly stirred. To Herzog even this tic was precious.
There was a flavor of subjugation in his love for Madeleine. Since she
was domineering, and since he loved her, he had to accept the flavor
that was given. In this confrontation in the untidy parlor, two kinds
of egotism were present, and Herzog from his sofa in New York now
contemplated them—hers in triumph (she had prepared a great moment, 
she was about to do what she longed most to do, strike a blow)
and his egotism in abeyance, all converted into passivity. What he
was about to suffer, he deserved; he had sinned long and hard; he
had earned it. This was it. —

In the window on glass shelves there stood an ornamental collection 
of small glass bottles, Venetian and Swedish. They came with the
house. The sun now caught them. They were pierced with the light.
Herzog saw the waves, the threads of color, the spectral intersecting
bars, and especially a great blot of flaming white on the center of the
wall above Madeleine. She was saying, “We can’t live together anymore.
Her speech continued for several minutes. Her sentences were well
formed. This speech had been rehearsed and it seemed also that he
had been waiting for the performance to begin.

Theirs was not a marriage that could last. Madeleine had never
loved him. She was telling him that. “It’s painful to have to Say I never
loved you. I never will love you, either,” she said. “So there’s no point
in going on.” _

Herzog said, “I do love you, Madeleine. 

Step by step, Madeleine rose in distinction, in ebulliance.
Her color grew very rich, and her brows, and that Byzantine nose of
hers, rose, moved; her blue eyes gained by the flush that kept deepening, 
rising from her chest and her throat. She was in an ecstasy of
consciousness. It occurred to Herzog that she had beaten him so badly,
her pride was so fully satisfied, that there was an overflow of strength
into her intelligence. He realized that he was witnessing one of the
very greatest moments of her life.