In enlarging, if a soft-focus lens is
used, or a diffusing device is placed over the
lens, it is the dark areas ‘and edges of the
image that are flared, and, in my opinion,
the effect is generally quite unpleasant.
Hasselblad makes several lens attachments
(known as Softars} offering different degrees
of diffusion. I have found that their effect is
not exactly the same as with soft-focus
lenses, since differences in diffusion are
slight as the lens aperture is reduced. Note
that the use of diffused light sources in enlargers 
bears no relation to the diffused effect of soft-focus 
lenses. 

Soft-focus lenses cause scattering of the light that 
is focused to form the image. The enlarger light
source is diffused above the negative, so
the image sharpness is not impaired. The
effect of a diffusion light source is to give
less harsh contrast and preserve separation
of the high values, compared with undiffused (
condenser) lighting.

On a pack-trip in the Merced River Sierra
about 1921, I was using a 37,4 Zeiss
Mirrorflex (an early single-lens reflex not
unlike the Graflex) to which I could attach
an f/5.6 Portland soft-focus lens of about
82-inch focal length. The lens was in its
original barrel and the focal-plane shutter
of the camera provided fairly reliable 
exposures up to a second. 

As I recall, the exposure for this photograph 
was %o second at f/8. I have forgotten the make 
of film or its effective speed. The negative enlarges
well to about 8x ro inches; beyond that the
image becomes rather gross.

Edward Weston once remarked that he
would not reject a print made on a bathmat, 
providing it was a good print. The
miracles of creative art lie not in particular
materials and methods, but in the basic
concepts involved. I recall the bright sylvan
occasion of making this photograph, but I
cannot say why I responded to the scene.

We all loved the land and our days in the
mountains, but my companions would
watch me struggle with some fragment of
nature and shake their heads: “What in the
world are you photographing that for?” A
good friend — a man of great culture and
intelligence — on first seeing my Pine
Cone and Eucalyptus Leaves, took me
aside and said, “Why don’t you apply your
talents to subjects that mean something?”
This revealed to me that others did not see
as I did, and I found that there was little use
protesting their attitudes.
