EXAMINED LIVES

1701. It still housed a large garrison of Prussian soldiers as well a
various state offices; along with Berlin, it was one of the most important 
cities in Prussia. A regional center of trade, it attracted merchant:
from neighboring countries like Lithuania, Poland, and Russia, and
also from maritime nations like Holland and England. There was a
significant Jewish community, and also a large number of Huguenot
refugees from France. Despite its remote location on the eastern 
frontier of East Prussia, it was far less provincial than most other German
university towns.

In 1740, Kant entered the Albertina University of Kénigsberg. The
only university in the area, it was one of the premier institutions in
Prussia and attracted a cosmopolitan body of students from neighboring 
countries. A Lutheran institution, reformed according to Pietist
principles, the Albertina did not admit Catholics or Jews, even though
applicants had to submit an analysis of some part of the Hebrew Pentateuch, 
in addition to interpretations of the Greek text of at least two
gospels in the New Testament.

All entering students were obliged to study philosophy, which was
regarded as a “lower” discipline that served as an introduction to the
school’s three “higher” faculties—medicine, law, and theology. Most
students moved on quickly to the study of theology, in hopes of being
ordained as a pastor or professor of theology. But not Kant: even though
the university was weak in physics and mathematics, he became preoccupied 
with natural philosophy and was eager to publish his research.
Instead of concentrating his efforts on completing a thesis in Latin, which
would have qualified him to begin teaching at a high school or at the
university, Kant took the unusual and precocious step of writing and
publishing a book in German, True Estimation of the Living Forces
(1749), in which he tried to mediate an arcane dispute between the 
followers of Leibniz and of Descartes over how to measure kinetic energy.

Shortly after the appearance of Kant’s book, he left the Albertina
without submitting the required theses or taking his final examinations. 
For the next several years, he earned money by tutoring the children of 
local noblemen. At the same time, he continued to write, working
to fulfill the requirements to graduate from the university, and also
completing a second book in German, which appeared in 1755: General
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens, or an Essay on the 
Constitution and Mechanical Origin of the Whole Universe, 
Treated in Accordance with Newtonian Principles.

In this Natural History, Kant argued that laws of physics, not
chance, govern the cosmos, and that God has created these laws so that
the universe may unfold harmoniously without any subsequent need
for divine intervention. His commitment to the scientific principles of
Newton did not keep him from speculating wildly about the nature of
the solar system: assuming the likelihood that there was life on other
planets, he conjectured that the creatures inhabiting Jupiter and Saturn
had cognitive capacities so vastly superior to those of human beings
that their intellects would make Newton seem like a child.

A decade earlier, the publication of such a book would have been a
defiant, even suicidal gesture for anyone hoping for an academic career
at the university, given its divergence from Pietist orthodoxy. But by
1755, Kant’s materialist approach to physics was perfectly consonant
with the views held by the monarch to whom Kant dedicated his Natural 
History: Frederick William H, better known as Frederick the Great.

Frederick the Great had become king of Prussia in 1740, after the
death of his father. Raised with punishing rigor according to strict 
Pietist precepts, he became a lifelong anticleric. One of his first acts as
king was to disestablish Pietism as the de facto state religion: He favored 
religious tolerance, remarking that every man had the right to be
saved according to his own lights. He also abolished judicial torture
and tried to establish (with limited success) a system of universal 
public education. A connoisseur of the novel theories and open inquiry 
associated with the philosophes of Paris, he installed Voltaire as an
intellectual ornament in Berlin (where the Frenchman lived for three
years, from 1750 to 1753). .

Besides being a Francophile, Fredrick the Great was an ommipotent
sovereign who proved to be a brilliant commander in chief. He doubled 
the size of Prussia’s armed forces and, in a series of bold military
campaigns, capped by the Seven Years War (1756-1763), greatly expanded 
the territory under Prussian control. By the end i his long
reign in 1786, Frederick had transformed Prussia from a minor principality 
into a rising continental power with a distinctive ethos of an unfettered 
enterprise and an unflagging sense of discipline and duty, which
left no aspect of Prussian life untouched.