
The tremendous fact for every one of us is that we have discovered a common solution.
—Alcoholics Anonymous

SOME SEVENTY YEARS AGO, a stockbroker named Bill W. who was down on his luck
because of his drinking problem sat in the kitchen of a house on Ardmore Street 
in Akron, Ohio.

The house belonged to Dr, Bob, a physician who had the same problem. 
He simply could not stop drinking. They sat over a Cup of coffee discussing 
a letter the broker had received from Carl Jung, the famous physician pioneer of 
psychotherapy. In the letter, Jung told Bill W. that if their new group
was to achieve success, they had to Pass on their stories. 

Essentially, the key to success was to help each other as Opposed to acting alone. 
Thus was born the “telling of the story” that has been the cornerstone of Alcoholics Anonymous. 
The framework these men developed has helped millions of people. Not only alcoholics, 
but gamblers, compulsive Overeaters, and sex addicts— and their partners—have all benefited 
from their original insights. The key outcome of telling the Story is that the teller admits 
that he or she has a problem while the listeners affirm the teller by acknowledging that 
they had the same experience. This transaction reduces the shame for all involved and 
supports them in their common commitment to stay sober.

Storytelling is powerful. When parents, for example, tell family stories, the children always
object if a piece is left out. One might ask why the children want to hear these stories again and
again since they already know them so well. The answer is that the storytelling is not about passing
on information. It is about bonding. The child feels bonded in that he or she is a part of the story.

To return to our earlier discussion about addiction stemming from a failure to bond, Twelve Step
groups actually begin a re-bonding process that helps people make up the deficits of the past.
Members of a Twelve Step community are accepted for who they are.

Such bonding holds incredible importance, and this additional example 
will illustrate why this is so. When Amnesty International first attempted 
therapy to help torture victims, they got nowhere. Victims of torture, 
even though they were miserable, resist Eventually, Al staff made a discovery. 

If torture victims could tell the room full of other people who were 
also torture victims, an accept The victim was then able to bond enough 
to make therapy success drug addiction and alcoholism.