

SHAMANISM AND ORDINARY RELIGION

When I arrived in the Upper Amazon in early 1970, I had just
spent several years living in Asian societies, Asia is a place where
the shattered shells of castoff religious ontologies litter the dusty
landscape like the carapaces of sand-scoured scarabs. I had traveled
India in search of the miraculous. I had visited its temples and
ashrams, its jungles and mountain retreats. But Yoga, a lifetime
calling, the obsession of a disciplined and ascetic few, was not
sufficient to carry me to the inner landscapes that I sought.

I learned in India that religion, in all times and places where the
luminous flame of the spirit has guttered low, is no more than a
hustle. Religion in India stares from world-weary eyes familiar with
four millennia of priestcraft. Modern Hindu India to me was both
an antithesis and a fitting prelude to the nearly archaic shamanism
that I found in the lower Rio Putumayo of Colombia when [ arrived
there to begin studying the shamanic use of hallucinogenic plants.

Shamanism is the practice of the Upper Paleolithic tradition of
healing, divination, and theatrical performance based on natural
magic developed ten to fifty thousand years ago. Mircea Fliade,
author of Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy and the foremost 
authority on shamanism in the context of comparative religion,
has shown that in all times and places shamanism maintains a
surprising internal coherency of practice and belief. Whether the
shaman is an Arctic-dwelling Inuit or a Witoto of the Upper Amazon, 
certain techniques and expectations remain the same. Most
important of these invariants is ecstasy, a point my brother and I
make in our book The Invisible Landscape:

The ecstatic part of the shaman’s initiation is harder to
analyze, for it is dependent on a certain receptivity to states
of trance and ecstasy on the part of the novice; he may be
moody, somewhat frail and sickly, predisposed to solitude,
and may perhaps have fits of epilepsy or catatonia, or some
other psychological aberrance (though not always as some
writers on the subject have asserted).’ 

In any case, his psychological predisposition to ecstasy forms 
only the starting  point for his initiation: the novice, after a history 
of psychosomatic illness or psychological aberration that may be  
more or less intense, will at last begin to undergo initiatory
sickness and trances; he will lie as though dead or in deep
trance for days on end. During this time, he is approached
in dreams by his helping spirits, and may receive instruction
from them. Invariably during this prolonged trance the novation; 
they may see himself reduced to a skeleton and then
clothed with new flesh; or he may see himself boiled in a
caldron, devoured by the spirits, and then made whole
again; or he may imagine himself being operated on by the
spirits, his organs removed and replaced with “magical
stones” and then sewn up again. 

Eliade showed that, while the particular motifs may vary between
cultures and even individuals, shamanism’s general structure is
clear: the neophyte shaman undergoes a symbolic death and resurrection, 
which is understood as a radica] transformation into a
superhuman condition. Henceforth, the shaman has access to the
superhuman plane, is a master of ecstasy, can travel in the spirit
realm at will, and most important, can cure and divine. As we noted
in The Invisible Landscape:

In short, the shaman is transformed from a profane into
a sacred state of being. Not only has he effected his own
cure through this mystical transmutation, he is now invested
with the power of the sacred, and hence can cure others as
well. It is of the first order of importance to remember this,
that the shaman is more than merely a sick man, or a
madman; he is a sick man who has healed himself, who is
cured, and who must shamanize in order to remain cured.

