
advantage instead of furthering principle. In this view Nationalism is 
for territory not culture. Social reform is for feeding the masses and it must come 
there will be violence—the class war. Until then, compete and get rich.
It might be said that such conduct has always been the way of state
classes, and individuals. But the atmosphere one breathes is different when 
the vulgar way becomes the ideal. It turns the thoughtful into cynics or 
pessimists. In the Germany of the 1840s a group known as Die Freien asserted
their desperate freedom by the declaration: “God is dead”; all is permitted.

One of their number, Max Stirner, developed a system under the title of
Ego and His Own’ that made it a duty for the individual to fulfill all his wary
by any means at hand; there is no reason not to; EMANCIPATION has no natural limits.

Other types of anarchism thrived in France and elsewhere. Proudhon
famous for his paradox “Property Is Theft,” preached the replacement of the
central state by small, spontaneous self-governing units. Blanqui, ready for
violence (<428), adopted the slogan “Neither a God nor a Master.” Out!
Russia, two wandering agitators and writers—Bakunin, the total anarchists
and ferocious enemy of Karl Marx, and the more liberal (at first) Alexa and
Herzen, made converts to the Proudhonian idea that the state must lie
destroyed by the spontaneous action of the working class and replaced bi
self-governing cooperative groups. These might be federated if they choose.
Within Russia, the new generation, according to Turgenev’s novel Fathers ail
Sons, is typified by the hero, Bazarov, the systematic nihilist.
The term implies living without doctrine, seeing no point in action. Such
despondents found their mood philosophically accounted for hb
Schopenhauer. Born in the same year as Byron, he belonged to I
Romanticist generation. He had helped bring into notice the sacred books
the East that underlay his well-worked-out philosophy in The World as Willa

Romanticism, the cult of poetry sub- Not long ago I read in a London newspage,
sided into the love of prose; that is, of I concerning some report of a miserable state
the novel. Its program acquired the of things among a certain class of workfolk,
ime of Realism and made it a vogue that “this realistic description is absolutely
word. The rea/-portion of the word is truthful,” where by realistic the writer simply
intended to mean factually true, obvious in everyday experience. 

It was suggested on an earlier page that in a precise critical sense a
ll artists are realists: what they depict in words or paint is to
them an object of consciousness; a dream, a ghost, an illusion is as real as a
beer barrel or a toothache. “Realism,” “realistic,” as used in talking about 
literature, therefore have a crabbed sense, and that sense became so rapidly 
corrupted that it is unfit for use by anybody who likes to be precise.

‘The novel was bound to become the dominant genre of the 19C, in part
lecause it apes the stance of history. It is written to sound as if its incidents
had happened. Moreover, by describing human predicaments in a social 
setting, it combines psychology and sociology and discourses freely about its
an invented people and events for the purpose it shares with history—
explanation by ANALYSIS.

Flaubert’s Madame Bovary is often taken as the original model of Realism
in fiction, although the ism was made a literary slogan earlier by Champfleury
and exemplified by his fellow theorist Duranty. Both had been impressed as
surly as 1848 by the declaration of the painter Courbet (566>), who
announced that he would paint nothing but “the modern and the vulgar,”
Meaning the commonplace. Flaubert detested the label Realist—or any
other—but his apprenticeship is enlightening as to the intention of the term.
liorn in the second decade of the century, he imbibed Romanticist ideas and
ideals from which he never really departed. The subject he chose for his first
hovel was Saint Anthony tempted in the desert. 

When the long work was finished, Flaubert read it to his closest friends, 
who damned it without pity, unanimously. The color, the imagery, the luscious 
rolling sentences, the desire follows upon desire and in so doing creates images 
of truth, love, the events themselves were found unconvincing—false and boring, Flaubert was
crushed. Saint Anthony was burned, a martyr to Realism. Flaubert must find illusion. 

The Hindus call it Maya and personify it as a goddess. There is another subject and 
do the opposite of what he had done. gne exception to the fate of desire—art. 
This is a scrap of solid wester ‘The opposite was Madame Bovary, the story of a provincial
 woman marRomanticism: art is not illusion nor always vanishing, The desire it arouses 
married to a dull man and leading a dreary life. She has vague aspirations toward
fulfilled by its object. Thus the cult of art serves as refuge to the bystander 
\lively society and romance in love. As a girl she had read Walter Scott and she
alienated by Progress. From his coffin corner, Schopenhauer also issued se _ fines for adventure. She takes the plunge into successive love affairs with two
eral volumes of essays and aphorisms in highly readable prose, salted with sa men who are differently mediocre and finds herself caught in financial discasm, that treat of the disagreeables of ordinary life and how they are d grace and passional despair that must end in suicide. Though somewhat
with by the wise. rspurgated for serial publication, the book was taken to court as immoral,

What of the art that is supposed to appease desire? In the shift frat though one would have thought Emma Bovary duly punished for her trans-

meant painful or revolting.

found to be the answer to the riddle of existence. The world is will in t)
sense of desire: human life is a perpetual striving for satisfaction—in