

superior to both. As she herself said, she thanked God that she had a man's
soul in a female body. She was in fact uncommonly strong, loved hunting and
riding unruly horses, wore low-heeled shoes, and had a voice that went from
girlish to mannish without modulation. At birth she had been taken fora boy,
her whole body being covered with hair. She viewed women with contempt,
especially as rulers; and in this scorn she included herself.

As the daughter of Gustavus Adolphus, the heto of the Thirty Years’
War, she found herself at 18 the responsible head of a European power that
dominated the whole Baltic area. She had been brought up a Lutheran and a
Humanist, both, which is to say that her creed was Christian stoicism. Her
tolerance was wide and her intellectual curiosity boundless. She spoke Latin
and four modern languages, her fluency in French punctuated by swear
words. By the age of 20 she had a European reputation as the “Minerva of the
North” for her patronage of thinkers and scientists, Grotius, Saumaise, and
Voss had been previous tutors at her court when she invited Descartes to
come and teach her philosophy. He kept refusing but she prevailed. Daily at
5 A.M. he had to expound the rules and results of his method. Although her
prime minister, the wise Oxenstierna, judged her intelligence “extraordinarily
brilliant,’ Descartes thought it unsuited to philosophy. This view of
Christina’s powers did not stop Pascal from dedicating to het, in a long letter
of eulogy, the calculating machine he had just invented. Under the strain of
teaching a mind of the wtong type, the early hours, and the cold of
Stockholm, Descartes fell ill with pneumonia and died in a few days in the
middle year of the century.

Christina, defying the traditions of toyalty, refused to marry. She says in her
autobiography that she did not lack normal desite—indeed, she thought that if
she had been a man, she would have been a rake; but she could not bear the
idea of pregnancy and of losing her independence. She began to be unpopular
on this account, though she handled affairs of state with judgment, balancing
the claims of the nobility by an alliance with the middle class and using in crises
the good old method of deceit and delay that had served Elizabeth so well in
England. Finally, the lack of an heit, criticism at home, and false rumors abroad
about her lovers induced her to give up the throne to her cousin. She was 28.

From that moment on, Christina was the object of vicious slander that
lasted until fairly recently. Three French playwrights, including Dumas, have
depicted het titillating misbehavior. Adoration turned to contumely, partly
because she had yielded her post of duty, partly because she was brilliant and
still a power in her retreat. She had 35 years of life ahead of her, and she filled
them with political ventures and cultural extravaganzas.

All this took place in Rome, after some travel in Germany and France,
The papal city found her court a welcome addition to its pleasures. It was
crowded with poets and musicians, thinkers and talkers, who enjoyed the
round of dinners, dances, plays, masques, ballets, and conversations that she
devised for her own pleasure. The successive popes approved and partook. In
‘the papal atmosphere Christina was drawn to the Catholic faith. Earlier, in
Sweden, she had gone through a period of doubt, induced in part by her 
interest in science. Disbelief in miracles and in the resurrection of the body had
left only faith in some supreme being. The Protestant theologians disagreed
with one another—none of them was right. When Stoicism went out of fashion, 
she was left without any system by which to interpret the universe. But in
Rome she found Catholicism seductive, more tolerant than any sect and
intellectually coherent. She became a Catholic “in her own way.” 
She read theology with renewed interest, side by side with mathematics and literature.

She also came to view her abdication as a sign of wisdom and promise of
fame: she would be compared to the great emperors Diocletian and Charles V.
Yet in other ways (she thought) she was unique and known to be such, a faultless 
creature who had been a representative of God on earth. Pride, she later
recorded, was her besetting sin. Others thought that her ordering the execution
of an upper servant who had betrayed her secrets was a greater sin. But het act
was within the law; Italian political customs were still merciless, and the 
judgments passed on her by writers of the Enlightenment for what took place a
century earlier are wrongheaded.

Christina’s efforts to find a role in the world, other than as a patron of
thought and culture, began in Sweden while she thought of abdication. She
would be Queen of Zeeland in the Low Countries if Cromwell would conquer 
the province for her. In Rome, she wanted to be Queen of Naples, where
a ruler was wanted. And in a more steady fashion she took part in papal politics, 
then often in the hands of powerful women relatives of the incumbent.
The practice of religion itself was chaotic; it swung from processions of penitents, 
whose bare backs were whipped by their servants, to occasions wheteher
it consisted of pastries depicting the crucifixion. And as usual,
thete were sincere souls, mostly noblewomen, who led pious lives or
renounced the world altogether. It was in Rome also that Christina found at
last a man to love, Cardinal Azzolino, a worldly, cultivated cleric and ladies’

man who helped het in her practical undertakings but who did not return her
passionate feelings. She kept them under control, except in the many letters
she wrote him, in which she calls herself his slave forever.

Christina’s many exertions brought her in touch with the great Baroque
sculptor Bernini, who designed a carriage for her, 
and with Mazarin, the The world is threatened with peace and
French king’s maker of policy, which quiet.
she wanted more favorable to the pope.