

Sydney Smith cried out against the practices of the
chimney-sweeping trade: “One that caused Smith concern was the education a
women. “If it were improved, the education of men would be improved on
because “the formation of character for the first seven of eight years o : e€
seems to depend almost entirely on them.” Besides, a country =e: employ
as many “understandings” as possible, which should include what
that women possess—wit, genius, and every other attribute of mind of whic
men make so eminent a use.” At present, {half the talent in the universe ii
to waste As for the feeling that “educating women is something ee
consider that “a century ago, who would have believed that country gentlemen
could be brought to read and spell with ease and accuracy, which we i 4 I
frequently remark? Nothing is so stupid as to take the actual for the possible.
Not that Smith had any respect for the public (= private pepe I
schools of England ot its two universities. All of them disgraced the ideal and —
the practice of education. The schools spent years teaching easenien young
minds to write Latin verses; a compliant graduate, says Smith, will ee
ten 10,000—more than in the Aeneid—and will never write saatker oa
older boys, left idle, were so unruly that a master was entitled to a 7 “
fund”—compensation for the risk of being pelted. As for the a ‘7
their teaching was sparse and narrow. Sending a youth there ensured only
4 ion in vice and waste of money.” .
ee religion and morals, the vicar showed the same penetrating mind as in
politics and social affairs. His faith as an Anglican was sincere and strongly
held, but not proselytizing. He ridiculed the Methodists, the ei
(Tractarians <471), and the “Clapham Sect” of intense evangelicals; if, €
would have fought against their persecution. In all these ways, he reminds one

THE MOTHER OF PARLIAMENTS © 533

of Swift, and like him too, he gave solicitous cate to his parishioners—their
health and housing, their disputes and other human predicaments. The wisdom of his moral outlook appears notably in his dislike of the Society for the
Suppression of Vice. “It is hardly possible that a society for the suppression of
vice can ever be kept within the bounds of good sense and moderation. The
loudest and noisiest suppressors will always carty it against the more prudent
part of the community; the most violent will be considered as the most moral.”

And as to the brand-new situations that the invention of the railroad placed

people in, his usual logic finally prevailed: “The very fact of locking the doors

will be a frequent source of accidents. Mankind, whatever the directors [of the

Great Western] may think of that process, is impatient of combustion and will

(ry to get out through the windows. And why stop at locking doors? Why not
Strait-waistcoats? Why is not the accidental traveller sttapped down?”

Sydney Smith was not exclusively a political animal. His literary judgments were acute. He praised Scott’s masterpiece The Heart of Midlothian when
everybody was damning it; he was almost alone in his low estimate of Samuel
Rogers as a poet; he did not care much for novels of contemporary life, but
Dickens’s Nicholas Nickleby won him over; the ethics of Mme de Staél’s
Delphine (<450) reminded him of Restoration comedy; and he was the first to
acclaim Ruskin’s defense of Turner’s art in Modern Painters.

Being represented as common sense incarnate, Smith has been denied
imagination. But humor of the highest kind such as Smith’s is pure imagination. Reviewing travels in South America, Smith describes the sloth always
hanging beneath a branch: fhe passes his life in suspense, like a young clergyman distantly related to a bishop} ’ The printer of the Edinburgh is always
tardy: he shall be fired “and compelled to sell indecent ptints zn the open air for
\ livelihood.” Macaulay monopolizes conversation—yes, but “he has occasional flashes of silence that make it quite delightful.” It was Macaulay’s judgment that Smith was “the greatest master of ridicule that has appeared in
lingland since Swift.” Although he kept the company exploding with laugh-

ter, Smith like many humorists was frequently plagued with melancholy. And
‘gain like such minds he incurred blame for showing the ludicrous side of
serious matters. He understood how this judgment came about: people go by
outward signs and “the outward sign of a dull man and a wise man ate the
same, and so are the outward signs of a frivolous and a witty man.” The
jenius he accounted for in similar terms that fit his own case: “He is eight
then, not one man; he has as much wit as if he had no sense and as much sense
is if he had no wit; his conduct is as judicious as if he were the dullest of
human beings and his imagination as brilliant as if he were utterly ruined.”
During the first half of his life Sydney Smith had to struggle with poverty
and disappointment, He was poor and had a large family to support. No
sooner was he a favorite in London than he was forced by a new law (of which