



One has only to read the first page of “To the Reader” to get the answer
no purpose beyond the description itself. Those other books were written
show through what mental travails the author went before reaching “
truth.” The truth in Montaigne is the portrait of the writer. ,
But was he not a skeptic whose motto, Que scaisje?—What do know?—
denies the possibility of truth? The debate on that question is
piece of futility. Turn the pages and read: the book contains a thousand assertions. 
Besides the big subjects—creeds, love, poetry,  politics, education, history, old age, and death—that Montaigne exhaustingly 
treats in varied contexts, he sheds glancing lights on a multitude of incidents 
topics—houses, Caesar, cats, poisons, the island of Cea, “and more,”
modern sales catalogues like to say.

Montaigne, then, is not “a skeptic” in the sense of a shoulder-shrugging
philosopher who looks at the world with tolerant amusement; he is in
the sense of the reader who does not believe without evidence and the scholar
who does not take any particular truth as final. T

I, who make no other profession, find in
myself such infinite depth and variety, that
what I have learned bears no other fruit than
to make me realize how much I still have to
learn. To my weakness, so often perceived, I
owe my inclination to coolness in my opinions and 
any hatred for that aggressiveness
and quarrelsome arrogance that believes and
trusts wholly in itself, a mortal enemy of dis-

God, resigned to any ills that Fortune
might bring, but free of the Evangelical
anxiety for grace.

So things stood with Montaigne
when he began his exploration. Gradually, without any upheaval of feeling
such as accompanies sudden conversion, he came to see that to philosophize is to learn how to live. One can
only speculate about what brought on
(he change: it seems reasonable to suppose that the turn came from the
increasingly vivid sense of the inmost self and its frequent independence
from the intellect. To learn to die is a mental project born of worldly observation; 
to learn to live is also a project, but it takes in that “depth and variety,”
that “weakness” to which Montaigne attributes the temper of his opinions,
and indeed of his experience as a whole.

‘The theme of SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS can never be more manifest than
here, and its embodiment in the Essays has a cultural import that has hardly
been recognized: Montaigne discovered Character. 

Before him, the accepted idea of personality was that it was ruled by one
of the body’s “humors.” A man, woman, or child was choleric, sanguine,
phlegmatic, or melancholic. All acts, attitudes, and moods depended on the
given disposition. The system, as will appear in Burton’s masterpiece (223>),
was well worked out to allow for temporary deviations and it fitted pretty well
the impression that one gets from out own neighbors: they always tend in one
direction while responding to the way we tend toward them. And in the family, 
habit creates this same sense of uniformity—“there he (she) goes again.”
‘his sameness is broken only by occasional vagaries that are explained away
as “not being oneself”

This psychology of the humors, also called the ruling passion, kept its
ancient authority for a long time. In the 17C Ben Jonson based on it two of his
plays Every Man in Fs Humor and Every Man Out of His Humor, and Pope versified 
it as late as the early 18th. To this day, the suppliers of popular novels are
incapable of anything better, which is good enough for ordinary consumption.

Meanwhile, in the essay “Of the Inconsistency of Our Actions,”
Montaigne points out the elements that make the difference between a type
and a character. The type may exhibit all kinds of tricks and tastes and 
gestures that make him different, recognizable, but his “stance” is unchanging,