The worker is one rather given to observing,
thinking, and doing. It’s not easy for him to
talk about and explain his work, but as he and
his work have been placed in false position
many times, I suppose he owes it to himself
to say something.

—John Marin (c. 1910)

Appreciation is beginning to be shown at the very end of the century, and one
much-played composer, Gyorgy Ligeti, has acknowledged Partch’s influence,
But the music of Bernard Van Dieren, again sui generis, is still awaiting the
serious attention it deserves.

Any contemporary observer of the cultural scene since the Great War
knows that it does not appear to him or her in its fullness and that judgment:
about any part of it are uncommonly liable to error. The neglect of Partch and:
Van Dieren illustrates the incompleteness; the clash of Opinion about a crowd
of composers, including Varése, Stockhausen, Cowell, Carter, Lueni O,
Babbitt, Boulez, Sessions, Wuorinen, and Ussachevsky, and about electronic
music shows the danger. It applies to modernists in every other art. A con
scientious critic faces a barrage of views that are tenable—and contradictory;
he cannot entertain them all; yet not to choose is to prove wrong.

As for spotting general characteristics, the task is difficult too. A critical
term first used about Modernism tells us why: its arts have been promoted and
accepted as “experimental.”” The word stands for endless efforts to be different
-- it follows a method, relies on others’ most recent research, and is subject to review by peers. The artist’s 
effort is entirely individual and uncontrolled. It is barely 
trial and error, since there exist no standards by which error can be gauged and a better trial made. 

What Modernism achieved is no less worthy for the lack 
of an honorific drawn from the laboratory. It would be 
better described—and this for more than one reason—as so
“launching a balloon” springs to mind was pastiche and parody, 
the part that appealed by scandal, the part that embodied the 
obscure hints of the unconscious, and—perhaps clearest of all
—the combination of parts that detach experimental proved a great 
convenience as a mind-opener, It made the public, inured to science, 
take the improbable with composure; it kept the lid down on the 
coffin of the philistine. 

But the artists’ suggestive effort:
did not promote the mission
before, the creators harangued the
crowd. Theories proliferated; book
periodicals, interviews, catalogues of
exhibitions, and program notes pre-eminent.
 
The inarticulate artist was at a disadvantage and made weak gestures 
to follow the fashion. If the articulate felt a similar inadequacy
when wanting to impress otherwise than by the work itself, they concealed it
in recurrent clichés. Their art was the result of “concentrated study of spatial
ind linear interrelations”; or as “the determination of spaces by their relation
(o surface and line.” The blurbs tang the changes on space, line, color, volute, 
and material or (in the other arts) brought in nature, sensation, feeling,
research, rigor, and control. Much of this was no doubt sincere but added 
nothing to the beholder’s previous knowledge that painters and sculptors 
are concerned with space, line, and volume, and others with the things they boasted
of, When the titles of compositions did not joke or provoke, they expressed
the same wish to appear learned, difficult, and scientific: Investigation No. 12,
Structure for Two Pianos, Study in Curves and Squares—this last rather superfluous.
‘The ancient maxim about art concealing art had lost currency.

Critics and artists who favored the serious, hatd-work posture, as against
the jokes and mockings that were prominent in the 1920s and 1930s and that
are still found spicing new works, have at times called these “the sophomoric
element” in Modernism. -The allegation rests partly on the fact that many
of the artists were very young and also on the quality of the jokes.

The times and contents of the Dadaists’ works were not witty, their
ridicule was not sharply aimed or worded with brilliance or originality. Painting
the mustache on Mona Lisa can hardly be deemed an inspiration that thrills and
makes one go back to it with renewed delight. The same is true of that photograph 
by Man Ray, rightly regarded as a master, which shows the back of a
seated nude woman, decorated with cutouts that imitate the J shaped holes of
a violin. One feels likewise about the titles Erik Satie gave his compositions:
Three Pieces Shaped Like Pears, Dried Up Embryos, Things Seen Without Spectacles,’
When Duchamp in later years signed a copy of the Mona Lisa untouched, he
wrote on it “Shaved.” These sallies from attists now in the pantheon call for a
few words mote.

The term sophomoric means wisdom expressed foolishly—or folly wisely,
If taken merely as dismissive it would not fit the case, for the results of Dada
and its continuing animus show that the jesting was not silly but effective. Yet
sophomoric does apply when one reflects that the mustache and the dorsal
violin were intended to be uninspired, adolescent—not a joke but a
ridicule mocks itself as well as its object. Modernist works of derision did not
provoke laughter and were not meant to. They were mock-funny, which
means serious, and those called “amusing” are designed to leave one hardly

Dada was born of a revolt that was shared by all adolescents.

