

A quite different cultural offshoot of the selfsame war was the work of
man who twice suffered the looting and burning of his house am
manuscripts by the soldiery, the Czech thinker

John Amos Comenius (Jan Komensky)

Born into a Moravian family, he was pious, but it was not religious devotion
 that made him oppose the highly successful practice of the Jesuit teachers 
A lifelong refugee, his wanderings took him to Poland, where he
established a school on a model of his own; then to Sweden, and finally to
England, where his ideas spurred thought in the minds of Milton and Lock
While there he received an invitation from John Winthrop to head Harvard
College.

Of the many books that he managed to write, the most famous is O 
Sensualium Pictus—the world portrayed to the senses, published at the exact
mid-century point. Others of his school texts were widely used and translated
into a dozen languages, including Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and Mongolian
Despite Luthet’s early appeal for free public schools to teach Protestant chil
dren, few were founded and none had a philosophy of education to match th
Jesuits’. Comenius supplied it. He was another in the long line of school
reformers who, with interesting variations, always say the same thing; if 1
their fated role {T he nature of a school being to ossify, it must be periodically
galvanized into life./The reason for the loss of vitality is that the school
on the small scale; it aims at forming a common mind as government aims at 
a common will. Both need periodic overhaul, a re-injection
of the original idea that got lost in routine,


At this point anyone who has had much to do with education or has
dipped into its history can guess what Comenius said: things, not words
hence the Sensualium of the textbook. Change school from a prison to a school
 (play site), where curiosity is aroused and satisfied. Stop beatings. 4 _ ‘8
Reduce rote learning and engage the child’s interest through music and games >
and through handling objects, through posing problems (the project =
method), stirring the imagination by dramatic accounts of the big world. The
Orbis Pictus teaches objects and places, simultaneously with words, by means
of pictures to be studied and talked about, a first hint of the audiovisual in
education. Comenius would also teach a universal religion compatible with
modern science, “Pansophia.”” All children should be schooled at state
expense, starting very early in affectionate surroundings: nursery school for Ce be
the four- to six-yeat-olds. He added the substance of the 20C thought-cliché: 4
education goes on as long as life.

This program aroused the enthusiasm of Samuel Hartlib in England,
who took steps to publish it but was delayed by the Civil War. It saw the light
in the 1660s and competed successfully with current notions of school
reform put forward by men who were—or would be—scientists. It was then
that Milton wrote his “Letter to Samuel Hartlib.” In part obscure, it ranks as
4 notable tract on education by teason of its authorship rather than its merits.
Milton wanted towns to set up a sort of barracks for 120 boys, who between
the ages of 12 and 21 would learn through books about things and through
these things would attain knowledge of God and likeness to God. That, said
Milton, is the aim of education. By it a man performs justly and skillfully all
ihe duties of private and public life, including war. Hartlib cannot have felt
encouraged in his crusade.

Comenius did not limit himself to school reform. He was a feminist and
pacifist, a political scientist and a philanthropist. He recommended prenatal
 clinics, marriage counseling, and geriatrics. He believed that men could
be improved and, like Bayle and the 18C Encyclopedists (360>), that “light”
would bring about peace and concord. The spectacle of war during his whole
adult life (said Comenius) had moved him to promote these ideas. The school
reformer went on to practice what he

preached, which is more than can be
said about most educationists. Wherever he went 
Comenius set up schools
and taught in them. No less invariably
“he received bids to go elsewhere and
repeat his success. His methods were
adopted, and some of his textbooks
were used down to the mid-19C. In an
essay of 1957, Jean Piaget asserted the

I began to concentrate my designs upon an
endeavor to reconcile the whole human race. If
men were shown what their complete and real
good is, they would be drawn to it. Were they,
moreover, shown the right means for its
achievement, an all-inclusive and all-satisfying
philosophy, religion, and statecraft would be
finally attained.

—COMENIUS (C. 1660)