

Browning’s verbal technique was to force commonplace words into cragged
lines, often Producing instead of the intended Realism a series of puzzles that
generated the Browning societies—groups of readers determined to help
each other find out the obscured meanings,

In the United States, Longfellow was Tennyson’s twin in popularity. His
work in that role has unfortunately drowned out his Private voice; he should
be read for such poems as the three sonnets prefixed to his translation
Dante’s Divine Comedy and for a few fine meditations such as “My Lo
Youth.” His versions of foreign lyrics and tales are often well done. In a 
different way, his contemporary Emerson also warrants going back to, now 
the dry prosaic type of poem is not only in vogue but dominant. 

But of this diversity of life, to render which he made language perform miracles,  
he has passages of rhetoric and its parody, others of pure stream of consciousness;
then too he sculpts in coruscating Images; he makes malaprops reveal the
speaker’s point of view; and he coins innumerable phrases that capture a
familiar emotion and its cause. He is the most inventive manhandled of the
language after Shakespeare. No alert reader will tolerate the foolish comment

1 showed that the saying betrayed poor observation of the common scene; and
left the deepest mark on western literature, thanks to Baudelaire,
 who were the judgment true, Dostoevsky would not have named Dickens as an
as his interpreter. A deliberate misfit in the United States and an acute critical
 influence on his own creations, of its literature, Poe delved into European works 
of all kinds for help to frame Both George Eliot and Thackeray came closer to the 
soberness of Realist narrative, but her moral and social dissertations and his 
satirical whispers tonal. In “The Philosophy of Composition” he launched an idea that had
future: he pointed out that in any long poem only brief passages here an
there are poetry; the rest are connecting tissue versified. True Poetry, 
moreover, is not made out of ideas and it must be word music. 

Out of these axiom came the theory and practice of “pure poetry” 
death to the Symbolists at the end of the century. 
Mallarmé’s sonnet “On the Tomb of Edgar Poe
acknowledges the debt.

In addition, Poe devised and defined the short story. The form concentrates
On the strictly necessary details so as to leave but one impression —of 
character, or situation, or atmosphere. The result can rank as “pure” too, In co in
patison with the Sptawl of the novel. Early in the 20C the short form see
about to displace the long from the first rank in popularity, at the same time,
as yet another of Poe’s inventions was becoming an object of worldwide
addiction: the detective story (739>). In his fiction, Poe’ His philosophy 
affirms confidence in nature’s workings, and his ideal of
Romanticist: the supernatural, the macabre, the erotic, I society is 
the civility achieved when the natural man or woman submits to the
Except for crime and detection, he eschewed the drabness of Realism 
are policing of the comic spirit. This Spirit reigns in a quarter equally far from
Moralism and from Realism. It calls for high intelligence and quick wits in the
and literary pleasure is not to be found in any other writer,