
* Ae motive was not hostility to plays, they continued to be write
and acted by dons and students in the universities and by lawyers at the Inns
of Court. It was the theater as a place of assignation and the players as 
disreputable characters that were aimed at. And yet, shortly before the closure,
when the highly moral Charles I and his French queen were still on the
throne, a troupe of French actors was invited to London, where it presented
works with the women’s roles played by women, instead of boys as the
English custom was. They were not hissed off the stage, as happened earlier
when a native troupe included actresses.

It should be added that the 1640s of the century saw the fall of
Shakespeare and his works into disrepute and neglect, Ben Jonson being by
far preferred (<142). Waller emerged as the first of poets.

The fit of morality that made an end of theaters and baths was no affectation. 
It was pervasive and may be seen in the more subdued clothing, the
toning down of rhetoric, the more rigorous good manners; perhaps also in
Hobbes’s joyless vision of man and in the chiaroscuto of Rembandt’s later
works. At any tate, the fashionable philosophy was Stoicism. Christina of
Sweden was a Stoic before her conversion to Catholicism; Pascal had been
one before the accident that made him-a fervent Christian; many others, 
without reading Stoic doctrine in Epictetus, fell in with the mood of its sober
expectations. ,

These changes may be attributed to the normal swing of social attitudes—the 
“whirligig of taste”—or in other words, fatigue and boredom.

Warring in Central Europe for a whole generation, then further wars in which
England, France, Spain, and Venice took part after the mid-century point,
had some dampening effect on the spirit. The long struggle over teligion had
not put an end to fervent faith; the number of sects and of shades of belief
within them kept growing; and by division these yearnings lessened public
hope, the hope of overcoming others’ errors and of seeing the fulfillment of
God’s plan.

In addition, the public mind was affected by the tone of the natural
philosophers. A universe of mindless, colorless matter in motion is not a
cheering sight. Nor is there much gaiety in mathematics—geometry looks
bare and algebra is even one more step away from the familiar, friendly numbers, 
Stoicism is abstract like algebra and unarousing, It sees a fixed order in
the universe, in which it is best not to resist or repine—whatever is, is right.
God or Providence governs wisely and does not interfere with its own laws,
not does it reward or punish in this world. The question of another, it leaves
untouched, so that apart from the hope of immortality, a Christian may be a
Stoic without feeling heretical. Stoicism does teach that to make the best of
life, moral conduct is imperative; it causes the least trouble and leaves the
fewest regrets. In the face of life the goal is composute.