 A model of the causal theory of creativity.

Hence the mostly normally distributed conditions for supreme achievement
interact in such a manner as to produce a J-shaped distribution, with huge
numbers of non- or poor achievers, a small number of high achievers, and the
isolated genius at the top.

This, in very rough outline, is the theory here put forward. As discusseil,
there is some evidence in favour of the theory, and very little against it. Can we

safely say that the theory possesses some scientific credentials, and may be said
to be to some extent a valid account of reality? There are obvious weaknesses,
Genius is extremely rare, and no genius has so far been directly studied with
such a theory in mind. My own tests have been done to study deductions from
the theory, and these have usually been confirmatory. Is that enough, and how
far does it get us?

Terms like ‘theory’, of course, are often abused. Thus Koestler (1964)
attempts to explain creativity in terms of his theory of ‘bisociation’ according
to which the creative act ‘always operates on more than one plane’ (p. 36). This
is not a theory, but a description; it cannot be tested, but acts as a definition,
Within those limits, it is acceptable as a non-contingent proposition (Smets:
lund, 1984), i.e. necessarily true and not subject to empirical proof. A creative

epts. As an example, consider US Patent 5,163,447, the ‘force-sensitive,
ind-playing condom’, i.e. an assembly of a piezo-electric sound transducer,
erochip, power supply and miniature circuitry in the rim of a condom, so
it when pressure is applied, it emits ‘a predetermined melody or a voice
sage’. Here is bisociation in its purest form, bringing together mankind’s
) most pressing needs, safe sex and eternal entertainment. But there is no
yper theory here; nothing is said that could be disproved by experiment.
sory implies a lot more than simple description.

The philosophy of science has thrown up several criteria for judging the
cess of a theory in science. All are agreed that it must be testable, but there
» two alternative ways of judging the outcome of such tests. Tradition
pcluding the Vienna school) insists on the importance of confirmation, the
‘ory is in good shape as long as results of testing deductions are positive
juppe, 1974). Popper (1959, 1979), on the other hand, uses falsification as his
iterion, pointing out that theories can never be proved to be correct, because
* cannot ever test all the deductions that can possibly be made. More recent
riters like Lakatos (1970, 1978; Lakatos and Musgrave, 1970) have directed
eir attention rather at a whole research programme, which can be either
dvancing or degenerating. An advancing research programme records a
umber of successful predictions which suggest further theoretical advances; a
legenerating research programme seeks to excuse its failures by appealing to
reviously unconsidered boundary conditions. On those terms we are surely
a Ze with an advancing programme shift; building on research already
lone, many new avenues are opening up for supporting or disproving the
heories making up our model.

It has always seemed to me that the Viennese School, and Popper, too, were
yrong in disregarding the evolutionary aspect of scientific theories. Methods
propriate for dealing with theories having a long history of development
might not be optimal in dealing with theories in newly developing fields,
acking the firm sub-structure of the older kind. Newton, as already menioned, succeeded in physics, where much sound knowledge existed in the
background, as well as good theories; he failed in chemistry/alchemy where
they did not. Perhaps it may be useful to put forward my faltering steps in this
yery complex area situated between science and philosophy (Eysenck, 1960,
[985b).

It is agreed that theories can never be proved right, and equally that they are
dependent on a variety of facts, hunches and assumptions outside the theory
itself; these are essential for making the theory testable. Cohen and Nagel
(1936) put the matter very clearly, and take as their example Foucault’s
famous experiment in which he showed that light travels faster in air than in
water. This was considered a crucial experiment to decide between two
hypotheses: H,, the hypothesis that light consists of very small particles
travelling with enormous speeds, and H,, the hypothesis that light is a form of