
siven it to you,” she said to Barbro. “Are you going farther
upcountry?”—“No,” Barbro replied. “Oh, you aren’t going an
farther up?”—“No.”—*Well, it’s none of my business,” Oline
said. You'll be going down again, then?”—“No, not that eith ’
Pll be staying here for the time being.” —“Oh sta ing h a
you?”—“Yes, I guess so.”

Oline waits a while, using her old head, full of politics. “Well,”
sre says, “then I won’t have to, I suppose. I couldn’t be moe
P eased! —0-o-h,” Barbro says in jest, “has Aksel been that unair to you?”
—“Unfair? Him? You shouldn’t go to the trouble of
making fun of an old woman who is only looking forward to
demption! Aksel has been like a father and a high envoy for ral
every day and hour, I cannot say anything else. But as it is, I have
hone of my — folks in these Parts, and I walk, lonely and forsake Property 
and have all my kin on the other
But Oline stayed on. They couldn’t part with her until after the
wedding, and Oline hemmed and hawed but said at long last that
sure, she would do them the favor of looking after the house ancl
the animals when they were to be married. It took two days. But
Oline didn’t leave even after the newlyweds had come back. She
was Playing for time—one day she said she was ailing, the text da
it looked like rain. She buttered up Barbro with ‘ittise of the
food—the fare at Maneland was quite different now, and there wa
coffee in the house, another great difference! Oh Ciline stopped at
nothing, asking Barbro’s advice about things she knew better herself: 
What do you think, shall I milk the cows in the order th
stand in their stalls, or shall I take Bordelin first?”—“Yoy can do as
you please.”—“Just as [ve always said!” Oline exclaims “You've
been around the world and met high-ranking and elewant eop!
and learned everything. It’s different with a poor creature like me. >
as Oline stopped at nothing, but engaged in politics around
the clock. Didn’t she even tell Barbro how good friends she
with her father, Brede Olsen, and how well she got alon with
him! Ho, she had Spent many a pleasant hour with him: he wa
such an excellent fellow, and so good-natured, you n ." d
gruff word from his mouth. Pe NE NES
But this wouldn’t do in the long run; neither Aksel nor Barbro
wanted to keep Oline any longer, and Barbro was taking all the
work away from her. Oline didn’t complain, but she would follow
her mistress with dangerously flashing eyes, and little by little she
changed her tone. “Hm, you’re grand folks now,” she said. “Aksel
was in town last fall, you didn’t meet him, did you? No, you were
in Bergen. Anyway, he went there for one thing only, to buy a
mowing machine and a harrowing machine. What are the Sellanra
folks beside you now? Nothing at all!”

She gave off little pinpricks, but that didn’t help either; neither of
them was afraid of her, and one day Aksel told her straight out that
now she had to go. “Go?” Oline asked. “How? Am I to crawl?”
No, she refused to go on the pretext that she was poorly and
couldn’t move her legs. Bad as this would be, it actually happened.
When the work was taken away from her and she was no longer active, 
she collapsed and became truly ill. She dragged herself around
for another week or so; Aksel looked daggers at her, but out of
malice Oline stayed on and finally had to take to her bed.

And now, lying there, she wasn’t at all waiting for redemption;
on the contrary, she counted the hours till she would be up and
about again. She asked to see a doctor, a: piece of uppishness 
unheard of in the settlement. “Doctor?” Aksel asked. “Are you out
of your mind?”—“How?” Oline asked gently, nonplussed. Oh,
she was so meek and mealy-mouthed, so glad at not being a burden to others,
 she could pay the doctor herself. “You can?” Aksel
asked. “Why not?” Oline said. “I’m not supposed to just lie here,
dying like a beast in the sight of my redeemer, am I?” Now Barbro
“Suck eT nose into it and asked cautiously, “What’s wrong?
Aren’t you getting your meals, which I bring to you in your room?
But I’ve refused to give you coffee, for your own good.” —“Is that
you, Barbro?” Oline says, merely turning her eyes toward her; she
is very poorly and, with the whites of her eyes turned up, looks
quite sinister. “I suppose you’re right, Barbro, that I would get
worse if I had a tiny drop of coffee, a spoonful of coffee.” —“If
you were like me, you would have other things to think about than
coffee right now,” Barbro said. “Just as ve always said,” Oline
replied. “You were never one of those who desired anyone’s death,
but that they should be converted and live. What—what’s that I’m
seeing! Are you with child, Barhro?”—“Me?” Barbro cries,
adding furiously, “I should throw you on the dunghill for your
tongue, that would serve you right!”