

towns down south in order to establish connections were something he could 
live on for a long while every time. Not that he let
himself go, traveled by his own steamship and messed around
with orgies. Just imagine, Eleseus and orgies! He was really odd:
he no longer cared about girls, he had given up on them, lost interest. 
But being the margrave’s son, he traveled first class, of
course, and bought lots of merchandise. He returned from his
jaunts a little more elegant and grand each time; most recently he
came back with galoshes on his feet. “Are you wearing two pairs
of shoes?” they asked him. “Yes, I have cold feet,” Eleseus said.
And they felt sorry for his cold feet.

Happy days, living like a lord, a life of ease and idleness! No, he
refused to sell Storborg. Was he supposed to go back to the little
town and stand behind the counter in that small general store
again and not have an assistant under him? Moreover, he intended
from now on to do business on a grand scale at Storborg. The
Swedes had come back and would flood the area with money, he
would be a fool if he sold. Aaronsen had to go away with a refusal
every time, more and more appalled at his foolishness in having
left the wild.

Oh, but Aaronsen could have kept his self-torture within reasonable 
limits and, similarly, Eleseus could have moderated his
great expectations; but most of all, the settlers and the villagers
should have been less hopeful and not gone around smiling and
rubbing their hands like angels assured of their bliss—something
to which the settlers and the villagers should have given a wide
berth, for now their disappointment would be enormous. Who
would believe it? The mining was resumed, to be sure, but at the
opposite end of the mountain, twelve miles away, at the south end
of Geissler’s mountain, well into another parish that was of no
concern to them. From there on the work was slowly to eat its way
north to the first copper mountain, Isak’s mountain, and be a
blessing for the settlement and the village. It would probably take
many years at best, generations.

The news came like a huge dynamite blast, with its stunning,
deafening effect. The parish plunged into grief. Some blamed
Geissler—that damn Geissler had again played a trick on them—
others went into a huddle and sent out a new deputation of en-
trusted men, this time to the mining company, to the engineer.

That led to nothing: the engineer explained that he had to start
work on the south side because it was near the sea; no aerial cable
was needed, indeed, next to no transportation. No, the work had
to begin on the south side. So much for that.

Then Aaronsen made his way over to the new work site, the new
El Dorado, without delay. He even wanted to take Andresen, the
assistant, with him. “Why stay around here, in the wilderness?”
he said. “You’d better come with me!” But Andresen wouldn’t
leave the settlement; it was incomprehensible, as if he were bound
to the place by something—he seemed to be happy there, had
taken root. It must be Andresen who had changed, the settlement
had not. There, people and circumstances remained exactly as before: 
the mining industry had been diverted from the region, but
no settler had lost his head over it; they had their farming, their
crops and their animals. They didn’t have much money, true, but
they had all the necessities of life, absolutely all. Not even Eleseus
was driven to despair when the flood of money passed him by; the
worst of it was that in his initial elation he had purchased a lot of
unsalable merchandise. Well, it would have to remain where it was
for the time being, embellishing the store and reflecting credit on
its owner.

The settlers in the wild didn’t lose their heads. They didn’t find
the air to be unhealthy for them, had a large enough public for
their new clothes and didn’t miss diamonds. Wine they knew from
the wedding in Cana. The settlers didn’t make themselves suffer
on account of goodies they hadn’t got: art, newspapers, luxuries,
politics were worth exactly as much as people were willing to pay
for them, no more; the growth of the soil, on the other hand, had
to be procured at any cost. It was the origin of all things, the only
source. The settlers’ lives sad and empty? Ho, that least of all!
They had their higher powers, their dreams, their loves, their
wealth of superstition. Walking up along the river one evening,
Sivert suddenly stops: down on the water sit two wild ducks, male
and female. They have spotted him, they have seen a human being
and become apprehensive; one of them says something, a brief
sound, a melody of three notes, which the other answers correspondingly. 
The same moment they take off, spin like two little
wheels a stone’s throw upriver and settle once more. Then one of
them says something again and the other answers; it is the same