 What a nuisance it would be if he was forced to blast it. The
strokes on the drill would be heard, alerting everyone in the house,
ug on, then went to fetch a lever and gave it a try—no. He
dug again. Isak may have begun to feel that the stone was teasing
him; he knitted his brows and gave it a look that said he’d merely
but found this stone to be give up on it then, betraying some sort of fear
that the stone would gain the upper hand?

He dug. He was getting awfully tired, he sure was, but where
he got a hold with the point of the lever and
tried it—the stone didn’t budge. Technically, you couldn’t find
fault with his grip, but it didn’t work. What was this, hadn’t he
broken loose stones before? Had he grown old? Funny, heh-heh,
 he had recently noticed signs of diminishment at is, he hadn’t 
noticed it or bothered with it, it was a mere fancy. And he goes 
at the stone again, fully determined
to get it out.

Oh, it was certainly no trifle when Isak bore down on a lever
with all his weight. There he lies, hoisting and hoisting, larger
than life, cyclopean, with a torso that seemed to extend to his
knees. There was a certain sense of pomp and circumstance about
him, his equator was astounding.

But the stone didn’t budge.

It couldn’t be helped, he had to dig some more. Blast the stone?
Shut up! No, he had to dig some more. He was growing extremely
eager, the stone just had to come up! You couldn’t say there was
anything perverse in this on Isak’s part, it was his old love as a tiller

the lever again? He thrust it down where he had
the best hope—no. How could a stone show such a strange defiance and obstinacy! 
But it seemed to work, Isak tried again, hopeful now. The tiller of the 
soil sensed that the stone was no longer invincible. Then the lever slipped, 
throwing Isak to the ground. “Damn it!” he said. It just escaped him. 
His cap had been given a push as he fell and hung sideways, making him 
look like a brigand, Spanish. He gave a spit.

Inger comes over. “Now you must come and get something to
eat, Isak,” she says, being perfectly nice and kindly. “Yes,” he
replies, but he doesn’t want her to come any closer and is unwilling
to talk. Oh, that Inger! She didn’t understand anything, she came
closer. “What have you thought up now?” she asks, trying to soften
him by hinting that he thinks up something grand almost every day.
But Isak is so gruff, so terribly gruff, and replies, “Oh, I don’t
know.” And Inger, for her part, is so dumb—oh, dear, she asks
questions and goes on talking to him and doesn’t leave. “As you
can see,” he says, “I want to take out this stone!” —“Oh, you want
to take him out?”—“Yes.”—«] can’t help you, can I?” she asks.
Isak shakes his head. But anyway, it was handsome of Inger to offer
her help, and he could no longer fight her off. “If you can wait a
bit,” he said, running home for a sledgehammer and a flatter.

If he could roughen up the stone a bit by knocking off a chip in
the right spot, the lever would have a better grip. Inger holds the
flatter and Isak strikes. Strikes and strikes—yes, it works, a chip
breaks off. “Well, thanks for your help,” Isak says. “And don’t
bother about food for the time being, I want to get this stone out.”

But Inger does not leave. And, in fact, Isak is pleased to have her
watching him at work, it is something he has liked ever since their
youthful days. And lo, he gets an excellent hold for the lever and
lifts—the stone moves! “He’s moving!” Inger says. “Are you joking?” 
Isak asks. “Am I joking? He’s moving!”

He had gotten this far: it rose, just barely; hang it, he’d won the
stone over to the cause and they began to cooperate. Isak hoists
and heaves with the lever and the stone moves, but no more. He
keeps at it a while longer, it comes to nothing. All at once he 
understands it’s not simply a question of body weight on his part; the
fact is that he no longer has his old strength, his body has lost its
pliancy. Body weight? It was easy enough to weigh on and break
the heavy pole. He had simply become weaker, or so it seemed.
This fills the patient man with bitterness; if only Inger 
hadn’t witnessed it, at least!

