
“The poet is not Hamlet. Hamlet is what he 
might have been if he had not written the play of
‘Hamlet’. Here we have the Aristotelian function of
tragedy once more illustrated, as well for the poet as
for his audience. Heine? also understood the inner
connection between mental suffering (nowadays called
“neurotic illness”) and the need of relief through poetic
creation.



In particular, where Hamlet bares his soul—for example,
the complaint about “th’oppressor’s wrong, the proud
man's contumely, the pangs of disprized lovers the law’s
delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient
merit of th’unworthy takes”—are singularly inappropriate 
to the Danish prince and heir to the throne, while
they are only too likely to have represented 
Shake speare’s personal experiences, Boas? writes:
makes the impression of choosing a theme as the vehicle
of thoughts which were surging in his own breast It
may be confidently maintained that only out of an
overwhelming subjective impulse could ‘Hamlet’ have
arisen.’’ He contends further: “The inference is irresistible
that Shakespeare at some time must have felt (It was through 
illness I discovered this urge, this my creative zeal.
himself in a peculiar degree susceptible Hamlet’s
weakness”; we have to translate the word “weakness” hermit
by paralysis from the repression of incestuous and_
murderous impulses. Bradley,? who Says that in Hamlet
Shakespeare wrote down his own heart, makes the
interesting comment: “We do not feel that the problems
presented to most of the tragic heroes could have been
fate of Othello, Troilus, or Antony. We do feel, I think,
and he himself may have felt, that he could not have —
with Hamlet’s problem”. In accord with this,
but far profounder than the simple identification.


Chapman® beautifully expresses a similar idea. “It is as
if he had passed through the valley of the shadow of
death, and had come out among the stars”. T.S. Eliot4
wonders “why Shakespeare attempted to tackle the
problem at all is an insoluble puzzle; under what compulsion 
he attempted to express the inexpressible we
cannot ever know’’.

How very different all this sounds from Keats’s description 
of the early Shakespeare as “the only perfectly
happy creature whom God ever formed”. Through what
heartrending experience had he passed since then from
which he was to emerge enriched with the ability to

