

tiresome as the coquetry of the other. If you like, I’m still in love
_ with her. I’m grateful to her for a few moments of relative bliss,
I'd give my life for her. But she bores me. I don’t know whether
I’m a fool or a scoundrel, but one thing I am sure of is that I’m
_ justas much to be pitied as she is, perhaps even more. My soul's
been corrupted by society. My imagination knows no peace,
my heart no satisfaction. I’m never satisfied. I grow used to
sorrow as easily as I do to pleasure, and my life gets emptier
every day. The only thing left for me is to travel. As soon ay
I can I'll leave. Not for Europe, though, not on your life. I'll
goto America, Arabia, India. With luck VI die somewhere along
the way. At least I can be sure that with storms and bad roady
to help this final solace will last me a while.”

“He talked a long time in this vein. What he said made 4
deep impression on me, for it was the first time I’d ever heard
such things from a man of twenty-five, and God grant it may
be the last. It’s quite beyond me. Now you’re a man who'}
lately been in the capital,’ he said, looking at me. ‘Is it true that
all the young people there are the same?’

I said there were a lot of people who did talk like that and
very likely some of them told the truth, but disenchantment,
like any other fashion, having started off among the élite had
now been passed down to finish its days among the lower
orders. I explained that now the people who suffered most fron)
boredom tried to keep their misfortune to themselves, as if if
were some Vice.

The captain could not understand these subtleties. He shook
his head.

‘I suppose it was the French who started this fashion of
being bored?’ he said, smiling artfully.

“No, the English.’

“Aha, sothat’sit! They always wereadrunkenlot,’ he retorted_

I could not help recalling the Moscow lady who used to
maintain that Byron was no more than a drunkard. But the
ptain had more excuse for talking this way, since, being
anxious to keep off alcohol, he naturally tried to persuade 
him if that drunkenness was the root of all evil.

Meanwhile he continued his story.

“Kazbich didn’t show up again. Still, for some reason I
uildn’t get rid of the idea that he’d come for a purpose and
as up to some devilry.

“One day Pechorin tried to get me to go boar-hunting with
m. I put him off for a long time — really, as if I cared about
ld boar! But in the end he got me to go with him, and we set
‘first thing in the morning with half a dozen soldiers. We
uted about in the forest and among the reeds till ten o’clock,

it found no boar.

“We may as well go back,” I said. ““What’s the point of
eping on? It’s plain we're out of luck today.”

‘But Pechorin wasn’t for going back empty-handed, no
iter how tired we were. He was like that. He’d get someing, 
into his head and not be content till he got it. He must
ve been spoilt asa child. At midday we did at last come ona
founded boar and got in a couple of shots, but it was no
od — he got away among the reeds. It just wasn’t our day. So
shad a bit of a rest and set off home.

We rode side by side in silence, trailing our reins, and we'd
 reached the fort — it was just out of sight behind some 
bushes — when we heard a shot. We looked at each other, both
 with the same suspicion, and galloped full tilt to where
shot had come from. We saw a group of soldiers gathered
the ramparts and pointing out across the plain. There was a
seaman going like the wind, with something white across the
Idle, Pechorin let out a shrick as good as any Chechen,
lobbed his gun from the holster and was after him like a shot,

