

Balzac’s femme de trente ans sitting in her cushioned armchair at
the end ofa fatiguing ball. On first seeing his face I would have
thought him no older than twenty-three, though later I would
have taken him for thirty. There was something childlike in the
way he smiled. His skin was delicate, like a woman’s, and his
naturally curly fair hair made a fine setting for the pale, noble
brow. Only a prolonged scrutiny of his forehead revealed
traces of criss-cross wrinkles that probably showed up much
more in moments of anger or stress. Though his hair was fair,
his moustache and eyebrows were black. In a man this is as sure
a sign of breeding as a black mane and tail are in a grey horse,
I will finish my portrait by noting his slightly turned-up nose,
brilliant white teeth and brown eyes.

I must say a little more about his eyes. In the first place, they
never laughed when he laughed. Have you ever noticed this
peculiarity some people have? It is either the sign of an evil
nature or of a profound and lasting sorrow. His eyes shone
beneath his half-lowered lids with a kind of phosphorescent
brilliance (if one can put it like that). This brilliance was not the
outward sign of an ardent spirit or a lively imagination. It way
like the cold dazzling brilliance of smooth steel. When he looked 
at you, his quick, penetrating, sombre glance left you with the
unpleasant feeling that you'd been asked an indiscreet question,
It would have seemed insolent, if it hadn’t been so calm and
indifferent.

All these thoughts may have suggested themselves to mv
merely because I knew something of his life, and possibly
would have made an entirely different impression on someone
else, Still, as you will hear nothing of Pechorin except from if,
you must be content with the picture I give you. Let me conclude
by saying that he was on the whole rather good-looking,
with one of those unusual faces that appeal particularly i
society women.


The horses were already harnessed. There was an occasional
tinikle from the bell under the bow of the harness-frame. Twice
Pechorin’s servant came up to announce that all was ready, and
ll there was no sign of Maxim Maximych. Luckily, Pechorin
Was to be in no hurry to be off. He sat lost in thought,
ing at the jagged blue outline of the Caucasus, I went up to
mand said:

If you'd care to wait a little longer you'll have the pleasure
meeting an old friend,’

Ah, that’s right,’ he answered hastily. ‘I was told about him
yesterday. But where is he?’