

all the men, The operation is swiftly performed, the fearsome figures
retire immediately from the lighted area, and the boy, in a mote
less dazed condition, is attended to, and congratulated by the

to whose estate he has now just arrived. “You have done well,”
say; “you did not cry out.”

‘The native Australian mythologies teach that the first initiation
rites were carried out in such a way that all the young men f
killed.* The ritual is thus shown to be, among other things, a
traumatized expression of the Oedipal aggression of the elder generation 
and the circumcision, a mitigated castration. But the rites pro
also for the cannibal, pacricidal impulse of the younger, rising grow
of males, and at the same time reveal the benign self-giving asI e
of the archetypal father; for during the long period of symbolical 
instruction, there is a time when the initiates are forced to live only
the fresh-drawn blood of the older men. “The natives,” we are told
are particularly interested in the Christian communion rite, and
having heard about it from missionaries they compare it to the
blood-drinking rituals of their own.”

In the evening the men come and take their places according
to tribal precedence, the boy lying with his head on his father's
thighs. He must make no movement or he will die. The father
blindfolds him with his hands because if the boy should witness
the following proceedings it is believed that his father and mother
will both die, The wooden vessel or a bark vessel is placed near one
of the boy’s mother’s brothers, who, having tied his arm lightly,
pierces the upper part with a nosebone and holds the arm over the
vessel until a certain amount of blood has been taken, The man
next to him pierces his arm, and so on, until the vessel is filled.
It may hold two quarts or so. The boy takes a long draught of
the blood. Should his stomach rebel, the father holds his throat
to prevent his ejecting the blood, because if it happens his father,
mother, sisters, and brothers would all die. The remainder of the
blood is thrown over him,

From this time on, sometimes for a whole moon, the boy is allowed no 
other food than human blood, Yamminga, the mythical
ancestor, having made this law. ... Sometimes the blood is dried in
the vessel and then the guardian cuts it in sections with his nosebone, 
and it is eaten by the boy, the two end sections first, The
sections must be regularly divided or the boy will die.**

Frequently the men who give their blood faint and remain in a
state of coma for an hour or more because of exhaustion. 

Writes another observer, “this blood (drunk ceremonially by

novices) was obtained from a man who was killed 
and portions of his body were eaten.”® “Here,” comments Dr.
Jim, “we come as near to a ritual representation of the killing and
iii, of the primal father as we can ever get.”

In one recorded case, two of the boys looked up when they were not supposed to.
“When the old men went forward, cach with a stone knife in hand. Stooping over
to boys they opened veins in each. Out flowed the blood, and the other men all
gave a death cry, The boys were lifeless. The old wirreenuns (medicine men), dipping
slveir atone knives in the blood, rouched with them the lips of all present.....
 The bodJe: of the Boorah victims were cooked. Each man wha had been to five Boorahs ate a
jilece of this flesh; no others were allowed to see this done”

There can be no doubt that no matter how unilluminated the
dilenaked Australian savages may seem to us, their symbolical cer-
“jponials represent a survival into modern times of an incredibly old
“ssiom of spiritual instruction, the far-flung evidences of which are
J) be found not only in all the lands and islands bordering the Indian
‘Vieoan, but also among the remains of the archaic centers of what

©» tend to regard as our own very special brand of civilization. Just
Jia much the old men know, it is difficult to judge from the pubished
 accounts of our Occidental observers. But it can be seen from
comparison of the figures of Australian ritual with those familiar to
4 ftom higher cultures, that the great themes, the ageless archetypes,
jou their operation upon the soul remain the same.

flor an astounding revelation of the survival in contemporary Melanesia of a 
symbolic system essentially identical with thac of the Egypto-Babylonian, ‘Trojan-Cretan
“labyrinth complex” of the second millennium 8.c,, see John Layard’s Stone Men of
Malekula®? W.F.J. Knight has discussed the evident relationship of the Malekulan
“journey of the soul to the underworld” with the classical descent of Aeneas, and the
Babylonian of Gilgamesh,” while W.J. Perry thought he could recognize evidences
of this culrure-continuity running all che way from Egypt and Sumer out through
the Oceanic area to North America,®t Many scholars have pointed out the close correspondences between the details of the classical Greek and primitive Australian rjees
of initiation. a
Ic is sill uncertain by what means and in what eras the mythological and cultural
patterns of the various archaic civilizations may have been disseminated to the farthest
cornets of the earth; yet it can be stated categorically that few (if any) of the so-called
‘primitive cultures” studied by our anthropologists represent autochthonous growths.
They are, rather, local adaptations, provincial degenerations, and immensely old fossilizations of folkways that were developed in very different lands, often under much
less simple circumstances, and by other races.