
Hindu mythology tells of the maiden Parvati, daughter of I
mountain king, Himalaya, who retreated into the high hills to p
a very one —_— A tyrant-titan named Taraka had
¢ mastery of the world, and, according to the prophecy, o: 1
of the High God Siva could overthrow him. Siva ome
pattern god of yoga—aloof, alone, indrawn in meditation, It
impossible that Siva should ever be moved to beget a son.

Parvati determined to change the world situation by m
ing Siva in meditation. Aloof, alone, indrawn into her soul,
fasted naked beneath the blazing sun, even adding to the he
building four additional great fires, to each of the four quarters,
handsome body shriveled to a brittle construction of bones, the sh
became leathery and hard. Her hair stood matted and wild. Th
liquid eyes burned. ,

One day a Brahmin youth arrived and asked why anyone
beautiful should be destroying herself with such torture. ;

“My desire,” she replied, “is Siva, the Highest Object. Siva I
god of solitude and unshakable concentration. I therefore am pl 
ing these austerities to move him from his state of balance and.
him to me in love.”

“Siva,” the youth said, “is a god of destruction. Siva is the
Annihilator. Siva’s delight is to meditate in burial grounds
the reek of corpses; there he beholds the rot of death, and th
congenial to his devastating heart. Siva’s garlands are of livi
pents. Siva is a pauper, furthermore, and no one knows anythi
his birth.”

The virgin said: “He is beyond the mind of such as you, A
per, but the fountainhead of wealth; terrifying but the sou
grace; snake-garlands or jewel-garlands he can assume or put off
will. How should he have been born, when he is the creator of I
uncreated! Siva is my love.”

The youth thereupon put away his disguise—and was Siva.”

Folk Stories of Virgin Motherhood

The BuppHA DESCENDED from heaven to his mother’s womb
in the shape of a milk-white elephant. The Aztec Coatlicue, “She of
the Serpent-woven Skirt,” was approached by a god in the form of
ball of feathers. The chapters of Ovid’s Metamorphoses swarm with
nymphs beset by gods in sundry masquerades: Jove as a bull, a swan,
a shower of gold. Any leaf accidentally swallowed, any nut, or even
the breath of a breeze, may be enough to fertilize the ready womb.
‘The procreating power is everywhere. And according to the whim
or destiny of the hour, either a hero-savior or a world-annihilating
demon may be conceived—one can never know.

Images of virgin birth abound in the popular tales as well as in
myth. One example will suffice: a queer folktale from Tonga, belonging 
to a little cycle of stories told of the “handsome man,” Sinilau.
‘This tale is of particular interest, not because of its extreme absurdity,
but because it clearly announces, in unconscious burlesque, every one
of the major motifs of the typical life of the hero: virgin birth, quest
for the father, ordeal, atonement with the father, the assumption and
coronation of the virgin mother, and finally, the heavenly triumph of
the true sons while the pretenders are heated hot.

There was once a certain man and his wife, and the woman was
pregnant. When her time came to be delivered of her child she
called her husband to come and lift her, that she might give
birth. But she bore a clam, and her husband threw her down
in anger. She, however, bade him take the clam, and leave it in
Sinilau’s bathing-pool. Now Sinilau came to bathe, and flung
the coconut-husk that he had used to wash himself with on the
water. The clam slid along and sucked the coconut-husk, and
became pregnant.

One day the woman, the mother of the clam, saw the clam
rolling along toward her. She angrily asked the clam why she had
come, but the shellfish replied that it was no time for anger, and
asked her to curtain off a place in which she could give birth. Soa