
A HERO OF OUR TIME

What won’t a woman do to hurt a rival! I remember one
woman who loved me simply because I was in love with
someone else. There’s nothing more paradoxical than the
female mind, and you can never convince a woman of anything — 
you have to arrange matters so that they convince
themselves. The chain of reasoning they employ to overcome
their own prejudices is extremely original, and if you want to
master their dialectic you have to turn all the textbook rules of
logic upside-down. For example, a normal approach would
be: ‘This man loves me, but I’m married, so I mustn’t love
him’. But a woman’s approach would be: ‘I mustn’t love him,
because I’m married, but he loves me, so...’ I have to use dots
here, for now the voice of reason is silent, and it’s mainly the
tongue, eyes and heart (if there is one) which do all the talking.
_ Ifa woman ever chances to read these notes there’ll be outraged cries of ‘Slander!’

Since pocts began writing and women began reading them
(for which our heartfelt thanks), they have been called angels
so often that, in their simplicity, they've come to accept this
compliment as the truth. They forget that the same poets - in
return for money ~ acclaimed Nero as a demigod.

I really oughtn’t to be so biting about them, I who have
loved nothing in the world but them and havealways been ready
to sacrifice for them peace of mind, ambition, even life itself,
But it’s not from pique or injured vanity that I attempt to
pluck from them the magic veil that needs a practised eye to
see through. No, all I say is just the result of

The intellect’s cold observations,
The bitter record of the heart.

Women should wish all men to know them as well as I do,
for since I stopped fearing them and understood their petty
weaknesses, I’ve loved them a hundred times more dearly.

PRINCESS MARY

 Incidentally, the other day Werner compared women to the
enchanted forest in Tasso’s Jerusalem Delivered,

_ ‘No sooner do you approach,’ said he, ‘than untold horrors
Swarm on you from every side — duty, pride, respectability,
public opinion, ridicule, disdain. You mustn’t take any notice
of them, but just walk straight ahead. The monsters gradually
vanish, and before you opens a peaceful, sunny glade, with the
green myrtle blossoming in its midst. But all is lost, if your
heart quakes and you turn back at the beginning.’

This evening was rich in events.

_ Iwo or three miles from Kislovodsk, in the gorge of the
Podkumok, there’s a rock called The Ring. It stands high on a
mill and forms a natural gateway, through which the setting
tin casts a last fiery glance at the world. A large party ofusrode
but to watch the sunset through this stone window, though, in
act, nobody gave much thought to the sun.

On the way home we had to ford the Podkumok.
Any mountain stream is dangerous to ford, even the shallowest of them, 
chiefly because of the way the bed shifts. It’s like a kaleidoscope, 
changing every day with he force of the current, and where there is a rock one day, 
there vill be a hole the next. I took the princess’s horse by the bridle
and led it into the water. It was only knee-deep, and we started
lowly across, moving diagonally upstream. It’s a well-known
et that you should never look down at the water when
tossing a swift-flowing stream, or you'll feel giddy. I forgot
To warn her about this.

When we were in mid-stream, where the current was fastest,
te suddenly swayed in the saddle.

‘I don’t feel well,’ she muttered feebly.