 “It is time for me now to leave this place.” So he came down
and filled the three bottles with water from the flaming well. In
the golden chamber was a table of gold, and on the table a leg of
mutton with a loaf of bread; and if all the men of Erin were to eat
for a twelvemonth from the table, the mutton and the bread would
be in the same form after the eating as before.

The Prince sat down, ate his fill of the loaf and the leg of mutton,
 and left them as he had found them. Then he rose up, took his
three bottles, put them in his wallet, and was leaving the chamber,
when he said to himself: “It would be a shame to go away without
leaving something by which the Queen may know who was here
while she slept.” So he wrote a letter, saying that the son of the
King of Erin and the Queen of the Lonesome Island had spent —
six days and nights in the golden chamber of Tubber Tintye, had
taken away three bottles of water from the flaming well, and had
eaten from the table of gold. Putting his letter under the pillow of
the Queen, he went out, stood in the open window, sprang on the
back of the lean and shaggy little horse, and passed the trees and
the river unharmed."

The ease with which the adventure is here accomplished sign’
fies that the hero is a superior man, a born king. Such ease distine
guishes numerous fairy tales and all legends of the deeds of incarnate
gods. Where the usual hero would face a test; the elect encounter
no delaying obstacle and makes no mistake. The well is the Worl

& Navel, its flaming water the indestructible essence of existence, the
bed going round and round being the World Axis. The sleeping
castle is that ultimate abyss to which the descending consciousnes
submerges in dream, where the individual life is on the point 

The first formula is abreaction in fantasy (my inside has already
been destroyed) followed by reaction-formation (my inside is not
something corruptible and full of faeces, but incorruptible, full
of quartz crystals), The second is projection: “It is not I who am
trying to penetrate into the body but foreign sorcerers who shoot
disease-substances into people.” The third formula is restitution: