

soul, within the body social, there must be—if we are to experience
long survival—a continuous “recurrence of birth” (palingenesia) to
nullify the unremitting recurrences of death. For it is by means of our
own victories, if we are not regenerated, that the work of Nemesis is
wrought: doom breaks from the shell of our very virtue. Peace then is
a snare; war is a snare; change is a snare; permanence a snare. When
our day is come for the victory of death, death closes in; there is 
nothing we can do, except be crucified—and resurrected; dismembered
totally, and then reborn.

Theseus, the hero-slayer of the Minotaur, entered Crete from
without, as the symbol and arm of the rising civilization of the Greeks.
‘That was the new and living thing. But it is possible also for the 
principle of regeneration to be sought and found within the very walls of
the tyrant’s empire itself. Professor Toynbee uses the terms “detachment” 
and “transfiguration” to describe the crisis by which the higher
spiritual dimension is attained that makes possible the resumption of
the work of creation. The first step, detachment or withdrawal, 
consists in a radical transfer of emphasis from the external to the internal
world, macro- to microcosm, a retreat from the desperations of the
waste land to the peace of the everlasting realm that is within. But
this realm, as we know from psychoanalysis, is precisely the infantile
unconscious. It is the realm that we enter in sleep. We carry it within
ourselves forever. All the ogres and secret helpers of our nursery are
there, all the magic of childhood. And more important, all the life 
potentialities that we never managed to bring to adult realization,
those other portions of ourself, are there; for such golden seeds do
not die. If only a portion of that lost totality could be dredged up into
the light of day, we should experience a marvelous expansion of our
powers, a vivid renewal of life. We should tower in stature. Moreover,
if we could dredge up something forgotten not only by ourselves but
by our whole generation or our entire civilization, we should become
indced the boon-bringer, the culture hero of the day—a personage of
not only local but world historical moment. In a word: the first work
of the hero is to retreat from the world scene of secondary effects to
those causal zones of the psyche where the difficulties really reside, and
there to clarify the difficulties, eradicate them in his own case (i.e., give
battle to the nursery demons of his local culture) and break through
to the undistorted, direct experience and assimilation of what C.G.
Jung has called “the archetypal images.”” This is the process known to
Hindu and Buddhist philosophy as viveka, “discrimination.”

MYTH AND DREAM

As Dr. Jung points out, the theory of the archetypes is by no means his own 
invention.

Compare Nietzsche: “In our sleep and in our dreams we pass through the whole
thought of earlicr humanity. I mean, in the same way that man reasons
in his dreams, he reasoned when in the waking state many thousands of
years....The dream carries us back into earlier states of human culture,
and affords us a means of understanding it better.” .

Compare Adolf Bastian’s theory of the ethnic “Elementary Ideas” , 
which, in their primal psychic character (corresponding to the
Stoic Logoi spermatikoi), should be regarded as “the spiritual (psychic)
germinal dispositions out of which the whole social structure has been
developed organically,” and, as such, should serve as bases of inductive
research.”°

Compare Franz Boas: “Since Waitz’s thorough discussion of the question of the
unity of the human species, there can be no doubt that in the main the
mental characteristics of man are the same all over the world... Bastian
_) was led to speak of the appalling monotony of the fundamental ideas of
mankind all over the globe. ... Certain patterns of associated ideas may be
recognized in all types of culture.”*"

Compare Sir James G. Frazer: “We need not, with some enquirers in ancient and
modern times, suppose that the Western peoples borrowed from the older
civilization of the Orient the conception of the Dying and Reviving God,
together with the solemn ritual, in which that conception was dramatically
set forth before the eyes of the worshippers. More probably the resemblance
which may be traced in this respect between the religions of the East and West is no
more than what we commonly, though incorrectly, call a fortuitous coincidence, the
effect of similar causes acting alike on the similar constitution of the human mind in
different countries and under different skies.”

Compare Sigmund Freud: “I recognized the presence of symbolism in dreams from
7 the very beginning. But it was only by degrees and as my experience 
increased that I arrived at a full appreciation of its extent and significance,
and I did so under the influence of... Wilhelm Stekel.... Stekel arrived at
his interpretations of symbols by way of intuition, thanks to a peculiar
gift for the direct understanding of them.... Advances in psycho-analytic 
experience have brought to our notice patients who have shown a direct 
understanding of dream-symbolism of this kind to a surprising extent. 
This symbolism is not peculiar to dreams, but is characteristic of 
unconscious ideation, in particular among the people, and it is to 
be found in folklore, and in popular myths, legends, linguistic
idioms, proverbial wisdom and current jokes, to a more complete 
extent than in dreams.”

Dr. Jung points out that he has borrowed his term archetype from classic sources:
Cicero, Pliny, the Corpus Hermeticum, Augustine, etc.”4 Bastian notes
the correspondence of his own theory of “Elementary Ideas” with the
Stoic concept of the Logot spermatikoi. The tradition of the “subjectively
known forms” is, in fact, coextensive with the
tradition of myth, and is the key to the understanding and use of mythological
images—as will appear abundantly in the following chapters.