
These special carriers of cosmic Power constituted a spirit
social aristocracy, Filled with a double charge of the creative
they were themselves sources of revelation. Such figures ape,
the dawn stage of every legendary past. They are the culture he
the city founders.

‘The Chinese chronicles record that when the earth had soli
and the peoples were settling in the riverlands, Fu si, the 
“Heaven Emperor” (2953-2838 B.c.), governed among them. He taught
tribes how to fish with nets, to hunt and to rear domestic 4
divided the people into clans, and instituted matrimony, From
pernatural tablet entrusted to him by a horse-shaped scaly mot
out of the waters of the river Meng, he deduced the Eight Tia
which remain to this day the fundamental symbols of traditions
Chinese thought. He had been born of a miraculous conception
after a gestation of twelve years; his body being that of a serpent,
human arms and the head of an ox.!

Shen Nung, his successor, the “Earthly Emperor” (r, 2838B.C.), 
was eight feet seven inches tall, with a human body but ¢
head of a bull. He had been miraculously conceived through the
influence of a dragon. The embarrassed mother had exposed her
on a mountainside, but the wild beasts protected and nourish
and when she learned of this she fetched him home. Shen
discovered in one day seventy poisonous plants and their aphids
through a glass covering to his stomach he could observe the dip
tion of each herb. Then he composed a pharmacopoeia that is still
use. He was the inventor of the plough and a system of barter; he
worshiped by the Chinese peasant as the “prince of cereals.” At
age of one hundred and sixty-eight he was joined to the immortal.

Such serpent kings and minotaurs tell of a past when the
emperor was the carrier of a special world-creating, world-suspending
power, very much greater than that represented in the normal hi
physique. In those times was accomplished the heavy titan-work,
massive establishment of the foundations of our human civilization
But with the progress of the cycle, a period came when the work
be done was no longer proto- or superhuman; it was the labor g
cally of man—control of the passions, exploration of the arts,
ration of the economic and cultural institutions of the state. No
required no incarnation of the Moon Bull, no Serpent Wisdom
the Eight Diagrams of Destiny, but a perfect human spirit alert
the needs and hopes of the heart. Accordingly, the cosmogonic
yields an emperor in human form who shall stand for all generations

{0 come as ti model of man the king.
Huang Tij the “Yellow Emperor” (r. 2697-2597 8.c.), was the

third of the august Three. His mother, a concubine of the prince of
the province of Chao-tien, conceived him when she one night beheld

4 golden dazzling light around the constellation of the Great Bear.

‘The child could talk when he was seventy days old and at the age of
eleven years suceeded to the throne. His distinguishing endowment

was his power to dream: in sleep he could visit the remotest regions

and consort with immortals in the supernatural realm. Shortly following his elevation to the throne, Huang ‘Ti fell into a dream that
lasted three entire months, during which time he learned the lesson of
the control of the heart. After a second dream of comparable length,
he returned with the power to teach the people. He instructed them
in the control of the forces of nature in their own hearts.

This wonderful man governed China for one hundred years, and
during his reign the people enjoyed a veritable golden age. He gathered six great ministers around him, with whose help he composed
a calendar, inaugurated mathematical calculations, and taught the
making of utensils of wood, pottery, and metal, the building of boats
and carriages, the use of money, and the construction of musical instruments of bamboo. He appointed public places for the worship
of God. He instituted the bounds and laws of private property. His
queen discovered the art of weaving silk. He planted one hundred
varieties of grain, vegetables, and trees; favored the development of
birds, quadrupeds, reptiles, and insects; taught the uses of water, fire,
wood, and earth; and regulated the moyements of the tides. Before
his death at the age of one hundred and eleven, the phoenix and the
unicorn appeared in the gardens of the Empire, in attestation to the
perfection of his reign.’