
epoch-announcing words of Nietzsche’s Zarathustra: “Dead are 
the gods.” One knows the tale; it has been told a thousand wa
is the hero-cycle of the modern age, the wonder-story of man
coming to maturity. The spell of the past, the bondage of tradition
was shattered with sure and mighty strokes. The dream-web of
fell away; the mind opened to full waking consciousness; and m
ern man emerged from ancient ignorance, like a butterfly from 
cocoon, or like the sun at dawn from the womb of mother night. 
It is not only that there is no hiding place for the gods :
the searching telescope and microscope; there is no such society
more as the gods once supported. The social unit is not a canal
religious content, but an economic-political organization, Ti Tl
af not those of the hieratic pantomime, making visible on earth tf
forms of heaven, but of the secular state, in hard and unremittity
competition for material supremacy and resources. 

Isolated societies dream-bounded within a mythologically charged horizon, 
no longer exist except as areas to be exploited. And within the 
progressive societies themselves, every last vestige of the ancient human 
heritage of ritual, morality, and art is in full decay.

The problem of mankind today; therefore, is precisely opposite 
to that of men in the comparatively stable periods of those
great co-ordinating mythologies which now are known as lies, The
all meaning was in the group, in the great anonymous formed not
in the self-expressive individual; today no meaning is in the 
none in the world: all is in the individual. But there the mead
absolutely unconscious. One does not know toward what one knows.
One does not know by what one is propelled. The lines of 
communication between the conscious and the uncononscious
human psyche have all been cut, and we have been split in two.

The hero-deed to be wrought is not today what it was in the 
century of Galileo. Where then there was darkness,
deed must be that of "questing to bring to light again the lost
 Alani of the co-ordinated soul,

Obviously, this work cannot be wrought by turning back, or
as been accomplished by the modern revolution;
for the problem is nothing if not that of rendering the modern world
cpisually significans—or rather (phrasing th inci
“Or ra ig the same principle the
other way round) nothing if not that of making it possible for men

oe women to come to full human maturity through the conditions
oF contemporary life. Indeed, these conditions themselves are what

us zones of the

\ now there is light
but also, where light was, there now is darkness, The modern a 7

VHE HERO TODAY 335

have rendered the ancient formulae ineffective, misleading, and even
pernicious. The community today is the planet, not the bounded
nation; hence the patterns of projected aggression which formerly
served to co-ordinate the in-group now can only break it into factions. 
The national idea, with the flag as totem, is today an aggrandizer of 
the nursery ego, not the annihilator of an infantile situation.
Its parody-rituals of the parade ground serve the ends of Holdfast,
the tyrant dragon, not the God in whom self-interest is annihilate.
And the numerous saints of this anticult—namely the patriots whose
ubiquitous photographs, draped with flags, serve as i fal icons—
are precisely the local threshold guardians (our demon Sticky-hair)
whom it is the first problem of the hero to surpass.

Nor can the great world religions, as at present understood, meet
the requirement. For they have become associated with the causes of
the factions, as instruments of propaganda and self-congratulation.
(Even Buddhism has lately suffered this degradation, in reaction to
the lessons of the West.) The universal triumph of the secular state
has thrown all religious organizations into such a definitely secondary, 
and finally ineffectual, position that religious pantomime is hardly
more today than a sanctimonious exercise for Sunday morning,
whereas business ethics and patriotism stand for the remainder of the
week. Such a monkey-holiness is not what the functioning world requires; 
rather, a transmutation of the whole social order is necessary,
so that through every detail and act of secular life the vitalizing image
of the universal god-man who is actually immanent and effective in
all of us may be somehow made known to consciousness.

And this is not a work that consciousness itself can achieve.
Consciousness can no more invent, or even predict, an effective 
symbol than foretell or control tonight’s dream. The whole thing is being
worked out on another level, through what is bound to be a long
and very frightening process, not only in the depths of every living
psyche in the modern world, but also on those titanic battlefields into
which the whole planet has lately been converted. We are watching
the terrible clash of the Symplegades, through which the soul must
pass—identified with neither side.

But there is one thing we may know, namely, that as the new
symbols become visible, they will not be identical in the various parts
of the globe; the circumstances of local life, race, and tradition must
all be compounded in the effective forms. Therefore, it is necessary
for men to understand, and be able to see, that through various symbols 
the same redemption is revealed. “Truth is one,” we read in