

Whereas, in the beginning, the waking state was
sliver exhaustion for the feeble ego consciousness, and sleep
was bliss, so that it could later surrender itself rapturously to
metaphohoric incest and return to the Great Round, now this return
becomes more and more difficult and is accomplished with inercusing 
repugnance as the/demands of its own independent
existence grow more insistent.) 

For the dawning light of consciousness, the maternal ooroboros 
turns to darkness and night. ‘The passage of time and the problem 
of death become a dominant life-feeling; Bachofen describes the mother-born, 
who know that they are born only of earth and mother, as being “sad
by nature,” for decay and the necessity of death are one side of
the uroboros just because its other side signifies birth and life.
‘The world wheel, the humming loom of time, the Weird Sisters,
and the wheel of birth and death, all these symbols express the
sadness that rules over the life of the adolescent ego.

In this third phase, the ego germ has already attained a certain
aspect among many other true and possible ones, and we refer to the
child stage only as the ‘stage of transition from uroboros to adolescence, 
without elaborating its independent existence. In this sense the work of 
Jung and Kerényi greatly enriches our theme.

In the child archetype the conscious ego is still incompletely separated from
the unconscious self, and everywhere there are traces of its containment in the
uroboros, the primordial deity. Jung therefore speaks of the “hermaphroditism
of the child,” and of the “child as beginning and end.” The “invincibility of the
child” expresses not only the place where invincible deity has his seat, i.e., the
uroboros, but the invincible nature of the new development which the child, as
light and consciousness, represents. Both these elements belong to the eternality
of the Divine Child.

With the phenomenon of its “abandonment,” however, we enter upon the
child’s historical fate. Here his detachment, differentiation, and uniqueness are
stressed, also the onset of that fateful opposition to the First Parents which deter.
mines the child's biographical career and at the same time the spiritual progress
of mankind.