

What puzzles me is, if IQ measures even roughly
the rate at which we learn, why a child with an IQ
of 50 should not in time get to be a reasonably
normal and competent person. It is said that, in
terms of what he knows and can figure out, the
average adult is not much beyond the level of the
average twelve-year-old. For all my skepticism
about the measurement and testing of intelligence, I
think this reflects some kind of truth. Then why
should not the child with the IQ of 50 catch up with
the crowd, more or less, by the time he is twenty five?
 What happens to him along the way to ensure
that he will never catch up?

I don’t believe any longer that IQ “measures
even roughly the rate at which we learn.” What
it does is measure, roughly, the rate at which we
learn certain things—on the whole, things that
upper-middle-class children tend to learn and
do. Beyond that, IQ tests measure our ability to
solve certain kinds of puzzles, usually symbolic
and very limited in extent, in a short amount of
time. It does not test and never could test what
Whitehead said was the most important aspect
of intelligence, the ability to ask good questions
and to know what questions were worth asking.
Nor does it—nor could it—test the ability to
work at and eventually solve large and difficult
problems over long periods of time. Even when
we set aside the heavy culture bias built into the
tests, they measure at best only a very narrow
and trivial part of the wide range of human
intellectual abilities.

So when people tell me that a child is “retarded,” 
I always ask, “How do you know? What is
the evidence?” I know one child who did not
start talking or walking until after he was three,
and whose speech, until after he was five, could
hardly be understood except by his own family.
Within a very short time and without any special 
treatment he became a fluent and skillful
talker, and one of the most brilliant natural
athletes I have ever known.

Our mistake is at bottom a mistake of language.
We take the word “normal,” meaning
usual, what happens most of the time, and turn
it into proper, correct, desirable, what ought to
happen all of the time.

What turned this particular child from a girl
whose body was too big for her behavior into a kind
of monster of fear and tension that would make you
sick at heart to watch?

I thought that had she been acting like a normal,
healthy child of half her age, she would have been
less distressing to watch. Then my mind’s eye conjured
 up a picture of her, romping around at the
concert like a six-year-old, and I sensed very vividly
the horror that this inappropriate behavior would
arouse in all who saw it. So it may well be that the
tension we see in retarded children is caused, not so
much by their being prevented from doing things
that to them seem perfectly natural.