
half a blade or spear Point resulted which could later,
with heat, be fused to its twin, ground, polished, and
sharpened. As the skill of smiths improved, they learned
to make the desired object in the round and all at once
in a single pouring. They modeled the object in clay,
patted on wax, added more clay on top, and baked. The
wax then melted and ran out of a hole at the bottom,
leaving a hollow mold into which the molten metal —
could be poured. When this cooled and hardened, the
clay was broken off, leaving a perfect, finished product.
By this method (the “lost wax method”) many beautiful 
art works were produced.

Copper, the principal everyday metal for spear
points, daggers, plowshares, and pins, was very soon
found to have its own disadvantages. Though better
than stone in some ways, it was not really hard or durable 
enough to suit ever more demanding tastes. And
so smiths began to mix copper with other metals to get
better results.

Again this knowledge probably came about by accident. 
All the ores were impure. Alloys nearly always
occurred naturally. It was only when men learned how
to get purer grades of copper that they also learned that I
the old, impure copper ore had really been better after _
all. And so they began mixing deliberately. Best of all —
the mixtures was copper and tin, which yielded the —
wonderful hard bronze for which a whole age has been ~
named—the Bronze Age (about 3000 to 1250 B.c.). —

Metals Replace Rocks

Euphrates Rivers depended on bronze. So, too, dic
cities on the Nile and the developing civilization in
Aegean world. Bronze was a big factor in warfare, I
a very good chance of dominating enemies and b
ing war lords.

Copper and tin are not the most common of metw
and soon the great cities sent their ships out qui I
around the known world for sources of ore. The
especially those of the maritime powers, grew bigg
and better; seamen became bolder and more skillex
navigation. Ships of the Aegean traveled as far a
British Isles, whose tin mines insured their popula (
The imprint of a Mycenean dagger, for examp
been found on one of the stone pillars of vener I I
Stonehenge, a circle of great stone uprights that mn
have been a kind of astronomical observatory, Pet \
the dagger was the signature of the Acgean archit
who helped erect the monument, or the mark of anc
dinary trader leaving behind his own “Kilroy y
here.” ae
Traders even went as far as the Scandinavian setth
ments which, having developed a craving for read
made bronzes, traded their amber in return. The cil
of Sumer (the Mesopotamian birthplace of civil
tion) traded-with sister cities in India. And an Eipy
queen sent her ships coasting down Africa as far