As we have said. we may roughly distinguish three stages 
of language, and two intermediate translations, between 
the outside world and the subjective receipt of information. 
The first stage consists in the acoustic symbols taken physically
as vibrations in the air; the second or phcuetic stage
consists in the various phenomena in the inner ear and
the associated part of the nervous system; the third or
semantic stage represents the transfer of these symbols
into an experience of meaning.

In the case of the deaf person, the first and the third
stages are still present, but the second stage is missing.
However, it is perfectly conceivable that we may replace 
the second stage by one by-passing the sense of
hearing and proceeding, for example, through the
sense of touch. Here the translation between the first
stage and the new second stage is performed, not by
a physical-nervous apparatus which is born into us but
by an artificial, humanly-constructed system. The
translation between the new second stage and the third
stage is not directly accessible to our inspection, but
represents the formation of a new system of habits and
responses, such as those we develop when we learn to
drive a car. The present status of our apparatus is this:
the transition between the first and the new second
stage is well under control, although there are certain
technical difficulties still to be overcome. We are making 
studies of the learning process; that is, of the transition 
between the second and third stages; and in our
opinion, they seem extremely promising. The best 
result that we can show as yet, is that with a learned
vocabulary of twelve simple words, a run of eighty random 
repetitions was made with only six errors.

In our work, we had to keep certain facts always in
mind. First among these, as we have said, is the fact
that hearing is not only a sense of communication, but
a sense of communication which receives its chief use
in establishing a rapport with other individuals. It is
also a sense corresponding to certain communicative
activities on our part: namely, those of speech. Other
uses of hearing are important, such as the reception of