

Perhaps early human hunters similarly allowed females 
to share in their kills. An occasional meat dinner
could always be eked out with fruits and leaves, which
the females could get for themselves. But when meat
became the all-important item of diet—perhaps also
when vegetation became scarce—the hunter must have
found his work overwhelming. Eventually, perhaps,
each male in a band concentrated on feeding just one
female (at most, two) and their joint offspring. And
so began the integrated human family, a hunting family,
 with a father.

Adding Daddy to the family did more for developing
human kind than just settling the dinner problem. The
novelty of shared experiences caused both male and
female to learn and grow and care for each other.
Early man, who had already become brighter by way
of toolmaking, introduced woman to the use and need
of “kitchen implements.” And woman, who had long
been growing brighter just through having to cope with
babies, handed Junior over to Daddy now and then, to
the general improvement of both. Human babies by
that time really needed the extra care, for they were
maturing much more slowly than their primate cousins.
The longer dependent childhood gave their heads and
brains a chance to grow. It provided a longer period in
which learning could take place. It also held the family
together longer, making fast the bonds of affection and
need.

By and by, as man had to range with his fellows
farther and farther afield in search of game, other
things happened. Woman became the keeper of the
home, the gatherer of supplementary vegetable foods.
Confined to home base, however, she must have developed a 
powerful curiosity about what went on in the
all-male hunting world. As the American zoologist 
William Etkin suggests, this curiosity may even have
helped to push along the invention of language. One of
the first sentences uttered must surely have been a
variation on the classic “What happened today at the
office, dear?”

Children began to remain with their parents longer
and longer, sometimes even after growing up. They
chose—or stole—mates from other family groups and
brought them home to Papa and Mama. The boys and
young men helped in the hunting. The girls helped
around the camp and sat with one another’s babies.
Perhaps they were joined in time by other family
groups. Not too many, however, for hunting bands
must remain small lest excess numbers deplete the
game.

With the expansion of the group and the widening
of mental horizons, definite rules had to be made—
rules to keep the group happy or, at least, willing to put
up with one another. Hunters had to know which man
would get which parts of the animals cooperatively
slain. They had to know what sort of behavior was expected 
of them during the hunt. And they had to know
that the women and girls left behind in the camp were