

His succession among the peoples, however, that
“ great vehicle”, has contradicted him magnificently.
It has addressed the eternal human Thou under the
name of Buddha himself. And it awaits, as the
Buddah that is to come, the last of the age, him by
whom love is to be fulfilled.

All doctrine of absorption is based on the colossal
illusion of the human spirit that is bent back on itself,
that spirit exists in man. Actually spirit exists with
man as starting-point—between man and that which is
not man. In renouncing this its meaning, its meaning
as relation, the spirit that is bent back on itself is
compelled to drag into man that which is not man, it
is compelled to make the world and God into functions of
the soul. This is the spirit’s illusion about the soul.

“Friend”, says the Buddha, “I proclaim that in this
my fathom-high ascetic’s body, affected with sensations,
there dwells the world and the beginning of the world
and the extinction of the world and the way that leads
to the extinction of the world ”.

That is true, but in the last resort it is no longer true.

Certainly the world “dwells” in me as an image,
just as I dwell in it as a thing. But it is not for that
Treason in me, just as I am not init. The world and I
are mutually included, the one in the other. This
contradiction in thought, inherent in the situation of
It, is resolved in the situation of Thou, which sets
me free from the world in order to bind me up in
solidarity of connexion with it.

I bear within me the sense of Self, that cannot
be included in the world. The world bears within
itself the sense of being, that cannot be included
in the image. This sense of being, however, is
not a “will” that can be thought, but simply the
total status of the world as world, just as the
sense of Self is not a “knowing subject” but
simply the total status of the J as I. Here no further
“reduction ” is possible ; he who does not honour the
last unities frustrates their apprehensible but not
comprehensible sense.

The beginning and the extinction of the world are
not in me; but they are also not outside me; they
cannot be said to be at all, they are a continuous happening, 
connected with and dependent on me, my life, my
decision, my work, and my service. But they do depend
not on whether I “affirm” or “deny” the world in
my soul, but on how I cause my attitude of soul to the
world to grow to life, to life that acts upon the world,
to real life—and in real life the ways of very different
attitudes of soul may intersect. 

But he who merely “experiences” his attitude, merely consummates 
it in the soul, however thoughtfully, is without the world—
and all the tricks, arts, ecstasies, enthusiasms, and
mysteries that are in him do not even ripple the skin of
the world. So long as a man is set free only in his Self he
can do the world neither weal nor woe; he does not
concern the world. Only he who believes in the world
is given power’ to enter into dealings with it, and if he
gives himself to this he cannot remain godiess. If only
we love the real world, that will not let itself be extinguished, 
really in its horror, if only we venture