

while on, we are startled to see that Grant has now escaped. How did he
do it? In a classic aside, which except for one frantic exchange early on is
his only dialogue in the whole 14-minute sequence, Grant tells Eva: “The
housekeeper had me pinned down for five minutes before I realized if
was that same silly gun of yours.” Like Grant, we the audience were
clearly shown, and then reminded, and still forgot, that the revolver way
a fake.

What was Ernest Lehman, the screenwriter, up to? His difficulty way
to resolve the movie’s mysteries without allowing it to end, Hitchcock
being set on an all-action finale at Mount Rushmore. Grant, Eva, ani
Mason must somehow all meet, clarify their true motives and identities
once and for all, yet resolve nothing. Lehman accomplished this witli
devices not unlike those that sterner critics of interactive fiction woul
disapprove. Lehman keeps Grant one location behind Mason—climbing
the house wall when Eva is upstairs; upstairs when the gang ate
downstairs; downstairs when they ate out on the driveway; out on the
driveway when they ate at the plane waiting to take off. Lehman ensures
that Grant cannot provoke a confrontation by having him outnumbered
and unarmed. He slows Grant down with a two-stage puzzle based oti
objects, each used once already. Interaction is diverted from people ta
things, from speech to gesture.

Thomas Hardy likewise avoided a happy ending to Tess by having
letter, pushed shyly under a door, disappear beneath a carpet, never to be
read; he disposed of Michael Henchard’s last act of love, a gift of
sanity, by having its cage draped closed so that it starved before anyone
found it; he demolished a solid farmer’s compost by sending him 4
flirtatious but unmeant Valentine from Bathsheba Everdene. All these
objects ate carriers, just as the matchbook was Cary Grant’s hones!
endeavor and the phoney revolver Eva’s inner self: a good girl, only
pretending to be a murderess. As with most good romances, it is hard
pin down exactly where in North by Northwest the lovers settle on each
other, but if one had to pick a single scene this might be it.


The Inventory of an Adventure

Sherlock Holmes comprehends people, when he does, through objecti,
the tools and clues that follow him as a comet is made visible by its tail
As the “Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle” (1892) opens, Watson, whit