

while on, we are startled to see that Grant has now escaped. How did he
do it? In a classic asidé, which except for one frantic exchange early on is
his only dialogue in the whole 14-minute sequence, Grant tells Eva: “Ihe
housekeeper had me pinned down for five minutes before I realized if
was that same silly gun of yours.” Like Grant, we the audience were
clearly shown, and then reminded, and still forgot, that the revolver way
a fake.

What was Ernest Lehman, the screenwriter, up to? His difficulty way
to resolve the movie’s mysteries without allowing it to end, Hitchcock
being set on an all-action finale at Mount Rushmore. Grant, Eva, ani
Mason must somehow all meet, clarify their true motives and identities
once and for all, yet resolve nothing. Lehman accomplished this witli
devices not unlike those that sterner critics of interactive fiction woul
disapprove. Lehman keeps Grant one location behind Mason—climbing
the house wall when Eva is upstairs; upstairs when the gang ate
downstairs; downstaits when they ate out on the driveway; out on the
driveway when they ate at the plane waiting to take off. Lehman ensures
that Grant cannot provoke a confrontation by having him outnumbered
and unarmed. He slows Grant down with a two-stage puzzle based oti
objects, each used once already. Interaction is diverted from people ta
things, from speech to gesture.

Thomas Hardy likewise avoided a happy ending to Tess by having
letter, pushed shyly under a door, disappear beneath a carpet, never to be
read; he disposed of Michael Henchard’s last act of love, a gift of
canaty, by having its cage draped closed so that it starved before anyone
found it; he demolished a solid farmer’s composute by sending him 4
flirtatious but unmeant Valentine from Bathsheba Everdene. All these
objects ate carriers, just as the matchbook was Cary Grant’s hones!
endeavor and the phoney tevolver Eva’s inner self: a good girl, only
ptetending to be a murderess. As with most good romances, it is hard (@
pin down exactly where in North by Northwest the lovers settle on each
other, but if one had to pick a single scene this might be it.

1 sofa; Holmes’s purple dressing-gown; pipe-rack; crumpled
Morning papers; a hard-felt hat with “H.B.” inside; lens; forceps; *a
white goose with a barred tail; *a card reading “For Mrs. Henry
Saker”; a brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a
hean in size, found in the goose’s crop; *a small morocco casket,
Jolmes’s strong-box; a Scotch bonnet; another goose, identical to
the first; two glasses of beer; a small thin volume and a great greasybucked one; a hanging lamp; a sovereign (coin); a four-wheeler cab;
waket chait; Holmes’s slippers; medicinal brandy; *a villain’s pipe;
'iwenty-five further geese; a bell for summoning Mrs. Hudson,
Tolmes’s cook.

© items marked with an asterisk appear only in dialogue reporting
events at which Holmes was not present, and are as such unavailable
et (notably 26 of the 27 geese). This leaves 21 possibles, of which
six illustrations include exactly two-thirds, omitting only
Wipers, strong-box, bonnet, coin, beer, cab, and bell. The coin and
¢ too small, the strong-box, bonnet, beer, and cab would all require
nth illustration showing a fleeting moment in the tale, so that only
eWspapers ate voluntarily omitted: and that because, presumably,
ning scene is already so cluttered.

The Inventory of an Adventure

Sherlock Holmes comprehends people, when he does, through objecti,
the tools and clues that follow him as a comet is made visible by its tail
As the “Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle” (1892) opens, Watson, whit