
Illuminations
But the immediate occasion for
Benjamin’s suicide was an uncommon stroke of bad luck.
Through the armistice agreement between Vichy France and the
Third Reich, refugees from Hitler Germany—les refugiés provenant
 Allemagne, as they were officially referred to in France—
were in danger of being shipped back to Germany, presumably
only if they were political opponents. To save this category of
refugees—which, it should be noted, never included the unpolitical 
mass of Jews who later turned out to be the most endangered
of all—the United States had distributed a number of emergency
visas through its consulates in unoccupied France. Thanks to the
efforts of the Institute in New York, Benjamin was among the
first to receive such a visa in Marseilles. Also, he quickly obtained
 a Spanish transit visa to enable him to get to Lisbon and
board a ship there. However, he did not have a French exit visa
which at that time was still required and which the French government,
eager to please the Gestapo, invariably denied to German refugees. 
In general this presented no great difficulty since
a relatively short and none too arduous road to be covered by
foot over the mountains to Port Bous was well known and was
not guarded by the French border police. Still, for Benjamin
apparently suffering from a cardiac condition,
even the shortest walk was a great exertion, and he _— hare
arrived in a state of serious exhaustion. The small group of 
refugees that he had joined reached the Spanish border town only
to learn that Spain had closed the border that same day and that
the border officials did not honor visas made out in Marseilles.
The refugees were supposed to return to France by the same
route the next day. During the night Benjamin took his life
whereupon the border officials, upon whom this suicide had made
an impression, allowed his companions to proceed to Portugal.
A few weeks later the embargo on visas was lifted again. One day
earlier Benjamin would have got through without any trouble;
one day later the people in Marseilles would have known that for
the time being it was impossible to pass through Spain. Only on
that particular day was the Catastrophe possible.



Il. THE DARK TIMES

“Anyone who cannot cope with life while he is alive needs one
hand to ward off a little his despair over his fate... but with his
other hand he can jot down what he sees among the ruins, for he
sees different and more things than the others; after all, he is
dead in his own lifetime and the real survivor.”
—Franz Kafka, piaries, entry of October 19, 1921

“Like one who keeps afloat on a shipwreck by climbing to the
top of a mast that is already crumbling. But from there be has a

chance to give a signal leading to his rescue.”
—Walter Benjamin in a letter to

Gerhard Scholem dated April 17, 1931

Often an era most clearly brands with its seal those who have
been least influenced by it, who have been most remote from it,
and who therefore have suffered most. So it was with Proust,
with Kafka, with Karl Kraus, and with Benjamin. His gestures
and the way he held his head when listening and talking; the
way he moved; his manners, but especially his style of speaking,
down to his choice of words and the shape of his syntax; finally,
his downright idiosyncratic tastes—all this seemed so old-fashioned, 
as though he had drifted out of the nineteenth century
into the twentieth the way one is driven onto the coast of a
strange land. Did he ever feel at home in twentieth-century Germany?
 One has reason to doubt it. In 1913, when he first visited
France as a very young man, the streets of Paris were “almost
more homelike” (Briefe I, 56) to him after a few days than the
familiar streets of Berlin. He may have felt even then, and he
certainly felt twenty years later, how much the trip from Berlin
to Paris was tantamount to a trip in time—not from one country
to another, but from the twentieth century back to the nineteenth. 
There was the nation par excellence whose culture had
determined the Europe of the nineteenth century and for which
Haussmann had rebuilt Paris, “the capital of the nineteenth century,”
 as Benjamin was to call it. This Paris was not yet cosmo-