

The intricacies of structure and design that have gone into the
making of The Recognitions, there is apparent in the work, as in
the flamenco music so loved by Wyatt, “the tremendous tension of
 violence all enclosed in a framework.” Much of what strikes the casual reader
as “excessive” in the book—its length, the virulence of its satire, the wide
and esoteric range of its allusiveness, the improbability of certain incidents
— suggests the extreme lengths to which William Gaddis was prepared to
go to create an art commensurate with all reality rather than some limited
aspect of it. As with Moby-Dick, the novel’s implications move in wider
and wider circles from the bobbing coffin of Queequeg, or the catastrophic
final harmony at Fenestrula.

“The Recognitions is an obsessive book, in that both author and character.
He termed the obsession of the novel as a whole, revolves around the following double question: 
What is the nature of, and what are the conditions for, genuine art?
That in The Recognitions “reality” and “art” are interchangeable metaphors
for each other is, I think, clear to every thoughtful reader. The cheap
tourist art of Montmartre, the upside-down painting of Max, the distorted
portrait of Recktall Brown—each symbolizes and epitomizes the context
of life that surrounds it. For Gaddis, art is the touchstone by which the
genuineness of life is judged, and the purity of human motives measured.
Wyatt is not only an individual artist, but an Everyman whose concerns
are universal; his art—and art in general—is no mere adornment or addition 
to life, but life itself in the deepest and truest sense. This is part of
the achievement of the novel: it succeeds in turning the simple analogy
of art and life into a baffling and frightening identity. In The Recognitions
“questions that ostensibly deal with aesthetics actually are questions that
probe to the very core of the human condition.

The Recognitions is remarkably self-reflective, in that the novel abounds
in authorial comments about itself, its style, its difficulties — 
even its probable reception by critics. Part of the parody of the book 
is directed at itself, as if Gaddis were holding up a mirror to his work as it progressed.
The comparison is an apt one, I think, for Wyatt uses mirrors in his work
to obtain deliberate effects, and a sense of “the obscure reveries of the inward gaze” 
is sustained throughout the novel. This kind of conscious self 
scrutiny, which  unlike a conventional prologue or epilogue is intrinsic to
the work itself, indicates that Gaddis’ own art as a novelist, as well as Wyatt’s
as a painter, is a thematic and structural concern. The Recognitions is a
first novel, and as such displays more than its share of self-consciousness,
but the author’s insistent scrutiny of his protagonist’s aesthetic? may well

Characters seem driven to extremities of experience, perception, and thought.
Individual figures such as Reverend Gwyon, Stanley, and Anselm are obsessed 
with the ultimate validity of reality, though their obsessions take
 different forms: arcane theology and philosophy, Catholicism and baroque
 music, absurdity and religious despair. Recktall Brown is driven by avarice,
Otto by prideful self-esteem, Basil Valentine by his personal variety of 
embittered fastidiousness. These obsessions jar each other in contrapuntal
relationships: Valentine and Brown, Stanley and Anselm, Gwyon and Aunt
May, and the quasi protagonist Wyatt in individual relation to each of them.
Indeed, it is through the focal character of Wyatt that The Recognitions
carries on a continual and insistent debate. That debate, which might be
have served as a personal exorcism of similar demons troubling his own art.

It will be useful, in this regard, to consider the kind of artist Wyatt is,
and the kind of art he recognizes as genuine. His aesthetic is one of precise 
and severe laws that aim at the creation of such genuine art. I have
used the word genuine here deliberately. It must be carefully distinguished
from original, which in the lexical context of The Recognitions has a
slightly pejorative connotation. The quest for originality is denigrated in
the novel more than once as a misunderstanding of the artistic task. Wyatt
quotes his teacher, Herr Koppel, on the subject:

—“That romantic disease, originality, all around we see originality of 
incompetent idiots, they could draw nothing, paint nothing, just so the mess they
reprinted from make is original . . . Even two hundred years ago who wanted to be origi-