

One conversation is juxtaposed to another. The same procedure is used in
New York, where Wyatt, his acquaintances, and countless anonymous citizens 
board buses and subways to locations in Greenwich Village and Central Park, 
or walk up and down the avenues. J. Alfred Prufrock hopes he
will have enough time “To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet,”
and the third-person voice of The Recoguinons expands on his words? “It
broke up and spread itself, in couples and threes and figures of stumbling
loneliness, into the streets, into doorways, they all went into the dark 
repeating themselves and preparing to meet one another, to reassemble, 
rehearse their interchangeable disasters . . . ” (315). The lives of these 
people are, by necessity, an ongoing charade because they have renounced or
lost track of their beginnings. Without this knowledge, they have no 
future and no opportunities for authentic growth.

Eliot’s work emphasizes the need to recognize the past as a point of
origin—personal, ancestral, religious, historical, and cultural. To serve
as negative examples, he shows one wastelander after another enacting
rituals that none of them understands, thereby debasing the fundamental
meaning. In “East Coker” of The Four Quartets, Eliot insists that “In my
beginning is my end,” and without acknowledging an origin there is only
fragmentation. Many characters in The Recognitions who are severed from
their origins remain hopelessly isolated from their community and from
those who care about them. Wyatt conceals part of his past from his wife
Esther, and, as in The Waste Land, their sexual encounters become automatic 
and loveless, a series of isolated gestures. With masculine aggressiveness, 
Esther mirrors the male pursuers of The Waste Land who
settle for impersonal responses, since lovemaking is an impersonal ritual.
Their staccato dialogue could very well belong to the clerk typist and the
carbuncular young man: “Wyatt? What. How are you? Fine. I mean how
do you feel? Empty” (100).

Wyatt’s trade as a forger of old Flemish masters elevates the execution
of line above the origins of conception. Since his goal is perfection, 
success is ensured by reproducing what has already been produced and refined. 
Only years later does Wyatt realize that his respect for the perfect
forgery has forestalled his own growth, something that “East Coker” warns
against: 

“The knowledge imposes a pattern, and falsifies, / 
For the pattern is new in every moment / 
And every moment is a new and shocking /
Valuation of all we have been.” 

His knowledge is false because in using another artist’s masterpiece, 
Wyatt accepts a pattern but rejects possibilities of newness. 
The pattern contains nothing that is his own and is therefore 
too limited a beginning to be authentic. Gaddis puns on someone else
who also sacrificed an essential part of himself for a supposedly higher
goal, “Origen, that most extraordinary Father of the Church, whose third 
century enthusiasm led him to castrate himself so that he might repeat the
hoc est corpus meum, Dominus, without the distracting interference of
the rearing shadow of the flesh” (103). Those who distort or abjure their
personal origins, in effect, castrate their own maturation. Wyatt similarly
ignores Esme’s authenticity by seeing only those parts of her he can use
to forge Madonnas. In contrast, Esme understands her origins and her 
basic nature — her free sexuality, even her addiction to drugs. Despite the 
disorder of her personal life, she possesses a transcendent and “inexplicable
splendour” that draws other people, except Wyatt, to her.

Gaddis continues to unearth endless varieties of contemporary grime
—fraud, forgery, plagiarism, counterfeiting, fear, neglect, deceit, 
and corruption. He also recreates the tensions between burial and resurrection,
between winter and spring. Part 1 of The Waste Land is entitled “The
Burial of the Dead,” and part 1, chapter 1, of The Recognitions is about
just that. Gwyon and his wife Camilla cross the Atlantic by ship, and she
is stricken with appendicitis. The surgeon on board is forced to operate,
but Frank Sinisterra, impersonating a doctor, is fleeing the American 
authorities who want to arrest him for counterfeiting. Like Madame Sosostris,
Sinisterra’s talent is limited; he cannot redeem Camilla’s future, nor
can “the wisest woman in Europe” (1. 45) see as much of the future as
she should. After Camilla dies on the operating table, Gwyon does not
allow her to be buried at sea (like Phlebas the Phoenician), and she is 
interred on the rise behind a Spanish village that possesses wasteland qualities. 
In the poem there is “Rock and no water and the sandy road / The
road winding above among the mountains / Which are mountains of rock
without water (11. 332-34). San Zwingli is similarly “built of rocks against
rock, streets pouring down between houses like beds of unused rivers” (16).
The prophet of The Waste Land insists that life can be resurrected, and
Camilla, true to the symbolism of her name, becomes the flowering corpse,
the dying and reviving goddess of The Recognitions. Those who gradually sense 
Camilla as part of their own origins, and those who perceive
her eternal spirit as integral to their own temporal selves are moving out
of the disintegration of The Waste Land toward the integration of The Four
Ouartets.

Wyatt is luckier than his mother. He is almost, but not quite killed by
his doctors, and it seems to be Camilla’s spirit that redeems him. Gaddis
echoes both “Gerontion” and The Waste Land to emphasize the corruption of 
the physicians who are baffled by Wyatt’s illness: