
and were forthwith put into quiet dungeons which proved such havens of
self-indulgence, unfurnished with any means of vexing the natural processes
that they died of very shame, unable even to summon such pornographic
phantasms as had kept Saint Anthony rattling in the desert (for to tell the
truth none of these excellent fellows knew for certain what a woman looked
like, and each could, without divinely inspired effort, banish that image
 enhanced by centuries of currency among them, in which She watched All with
inflamed eyes fixed in the substantial antennae on Her chest). (9-10)

Sir Thomas Browne, a seventeenth-century English physician and author, 
is cited by Croll as a paradigmatic stylist of loose baroque. Here is
a passage from Browne’s Religio Medici that demonstrates the elements
of that style:

As there were many Reformers, so likewise many reformations; every 
Countrey proceeding in a particular way and Method, according as their
 national interest together with their constitution and clime inclined them, 
some angrily and with extremitie, others calmely, and with mediocrity, 
not rending, but easily dividing the community, and leaving an honest possibility
of a reconciliation, which though peaceable Spirits doe desire, and may conceive 
that revolution of time, and the mercies of God may effect; yet that
judgement that shall consider the present antipathies between the two extremes, 
their contrarieties in condition, affection and opinion, may with
the same hopes expect an union in the poles of Heaven.

Browne’s sentence develops in associative reflections on the broad topic
of reformers and reformations. The first two clauses do not restrictively
direct what follows; rather, they provide a loose Basis for a variety of 
topics, each following the other, although they follow neither as logical
necessity or as non sequitur, but as an associative response to a prior
thought.

Gaddis uses the same associative development in his sentence about the
heretical Spanish monks. He begins with an explanation of their heretical
error, which is followed by a corctiption of their punishment, which leads
to a contrast of the monks and Saint Anthony, followed by a long parenthetical 
discussion of the order’s traditional misconceptions about female
anatomy. Gaddis does not seem to be recording what he has already thought
out so much as he is describing his imaginative associations as they occur
to him. 

The loose baroque style gives the novel a sense of unfolding possibilities, 
but it is less well understood as a progressive, sequential narrative
that lays out one plot ingredient after another than as an inventional 
clustering of linear narrative segments that are properly perceived in patterns.
A painterly analogy to this construction is pointillism. Another is television, 
which projects its pictures in a manner similar to the constructions/
distributions used by Gaddis. In the cathode-ray tube a scanning finger
electronically distributes a screen full of lines that compose the shades of
the picture. Even as this moving finger contours a whole-screen complex
of shades, the shades are redistributed in a rapid progression of images.
The viewer’s perception of television is one of total pattern recognition —
a perception unlike the fragmented, marching-dot construction of the conventional novel.

The Recognitions contains explanations of these postmodern constructions/distributions. 
In the following long passage, the novel’s protagonist,
Wyatt Gwyon, discusses writing:

—How .. . how fragile situations are. But not tenuous. Delicate, but not
flimsy, not indulgent. Delicate, that’s why they keep breaking, they must break
and you must get the pieces together and show it before it breaks again, or
put them aside for a moment when something else breaks and turn to that,
and all this keeps going on. That’s why most writing now, if you read it they
go on one two three four and tell you what happened like newspaper 
counts. [. . .] They write for people who read with the surface of their minds,
people with sending BOGUS  demands on tees, people brought up reading for facts,
 who know what’s going to come next andwant to know what’s coming next, and get 
angry at surprises. Why, all this around us is for people who can keep their balance 
only in the light, where they move as though nothing were fragile, nothing tempered by possibility, 
and all of a sudden bang! something breaks. Then you have to stop
and put the pieces together again. But you never can put them back together
quite the same way. You stop when you can and expose things, and leave
them within reach, and others come on by themselves, and they break, and
even then you may put the pieces aside just out of reach until you can bring
them back and show them, put together slightly different, maybe a little more
enduring, until you’ve broken it and picked up the pieces enough times, and
you have the whole thing in all its dimensions. (113-14)

The “situations” that “keep breaking” are also the “pieces” that are put
together again and again, although never in “quite the same way.” These
situations/pieces are the recurring characters, descriptions, dialogue fragments, 
and events of the novel. The patterns they cluster into are not permanent but are 
constantly breaking and then being “put together slightly
different, maybe a little more enduring.” The progress of the novel is not
“one two three four,” but complex after complex of configurations being