
Gaddis, and also Stanley seek belief through art, that is, 
through the understanding. Yet even as Gaddis affirms in a 
practical manner the way of reason, he asks his readers to 
see the folly of pursuing belief through intellection. 
Valentine is right when he says, “It’s true then? We’re-not 
supposed to understand?” (399). Instead, belief must in some way 
precede understanding, reason being able to take us only so far 
and no farther. 

It is, as Pascal asserts in Pensees, “the heart which perceives God and not
the reason,” something that Esme realizes even as the others do not. In
her suicide note she writes, “Paintings are metaphors for reality,-but 
instead _of being an aid to realization obscure the reality which is far more
profound” (504). _

“Wyatt soon confronts the error of his thought. “The devil is,” as Stanley 
remarks, “the father of false art” (495), and Wyatt has been in his active employ. 
His forgeries have not been an affirmation of belief but a denial. Recalling Saint 
Anselm’s “credo ut intelligam,” Wyatt comes to see everything too clearly. He 
experiences a “crash of reality” and vows to throw over his role as artist, 
the “exposer of mysteries,” for that of the priest, the “guardian of mysteries.” 

Nevertheless, Wyatt remains emotionally wrought. His rush to change situations 
smacks too much of desperation,as Valentine notices. Valentine compares him to 
his own childhood friend, Martin:

—You and Martin. The ones who wake up late. You suddenly realize what
is happening around you, the desperate attempts on all sides to reconcile
the ideal with reality, you call it corruption and think it new. Some of us
have always known it, the others never know. You and Martin are the ones
who cause the trouble, waking suddenly, to be surprised. (409)

However, Wyatt does set about to right all the wrong he has done—to
renounce his forgeries and to redeem himself in the eyes of Esme. The first
matter naturally fails. Nobody wants to believe that already authenticated
Flemish masterworks are not just that; and though Wyatt makes a most
sincere effort to reveal the fraudulence of his work, boisterously upsetting
a Brown Christmas party in the process, no one’s mind is turned. Nor does
Wyatt fare better in the second matter, for though he madly combs the
city looking for Esme, she is not to be found.

There is at this point in the novel a movement reminiscent of, Henry
James’ The Ambassadors, for as Chad Newsome and Lambert Strether appear 
figuratively to change places as that novel moves to its completion,
so too in The Recognitions do Wyatt and Stanley exchange positions. 
Stanley and Wyatt are alike in that they both reject artistic modernism for a
style associated with a pious age: Stanley imitates the music of Gabrieli,
while Wyatt imitates the art of the Flanders Guild. Stanley, however, is the
self-conscious artist who even as he works toward the completion of his
mass understands that we destroy the thing we love. Unlike Wyatt, he does
not consider himself exempt from the modern disease, and he knows that
even as he aims for perfection in his music, perfection is no longer possible. 

It is no more possible to piece together the fragments of modernity
than to put Humpty-Dumpty back together again. Stanley says to Agnes:

—That’s what it is, a disease, you can’t live like we do without catching it.
Because we get time given to us in fragments, that’s the only way we know
it. Finally we can’t even conceive of a continuum of time. Every fragment
exists by itself, and that’s why we live among palimpsests, because finally
all the work should fit into one whole, and express an entire perfect action,
as Aristotle says, and it’s impossible now, it’s impossible, because of the
breakage, there are pieces everywhere . . . (657)

Wyatt lacks Stanley’s self-consciousness. Unlike Stanley, he does not at
first realize that “the devil is the father of false art.” Nor is he mindful
of the hurt that he causes others, particularly Esme, in the pursuit of his
art. Wyatt does, in fact, destroy the one he loves. Lastly, he oddly believes
in the possibility of accounting for the accumulation and making it one.
But now, after all that has happened, it is Wyatt, even in his madness, who
begins to see things more clearly. And at the end, it is Wyatt, not Stanley,
who really does try to pass beyond the accumulation.

Exhausted, Wyatt seeks rest at the Real Monasterio de Nuestra Sefiora
de la Otra Vez. Wyatt tells Ludy, “It’s a place here to rest, to rest here, 
finally, a place here to rest” (937). Wyatt’s mind has slipped further into
madness, but it is a madness intermittently relieved by great lucidity. He
sees his past mistakes clearly. He sees that he has pursued the wrong path
that the separation in his work was not a testimony to his faith, but the
opposite. “Separateness,” Wyatt says, “that’s what went wrong” (932).

Had he models, Wyatt now sees, they should have been a Titian or an
El Greco, for it is in Titian, the supreme colorist, and his student, El Greco,
that the outside world is brought together not as a composition of juxtaposed 
fragments but as a harmonious whole. Van der Goes and van der
Weyden are draftsmen, Titian and El Greco colorists. The difference is that
the draftsman sets a high priority on delineating reality, of separating one
object from another and seeing that all objects are spatially coordinated.
The colorist, on the other hand, is more interested in the harmony of things,
the way one object’s color will lend itself to another. Color for him is 
diffused in space; it impresses no clear edge between objects.
