The Recognitions seems complicated and often obscure, one aspect
of it remains clear, and that is the profound impact of T. S. Eliot. 
Perhaps only a discerning reader will realize the formal impact of the poetry—
the shifting points of view, the Juxtaposition of past and present, and the
spatialization or of events-according-to-location rather than
chronology. Even a casual reader, however, will sense the thematic impact
oF Eliot's poetry—arid landscapes, mourning women, questers, imposters,
fertility figures, chapels, bells, burials, and resurrections. Although the ma-

Something as specific as “Twit twit twit” from The Waste Land (I. 203)!
becomes the title of a book that Max or one of his friends brings to a
Greenwich Village bar. Prufrock’s fear that his female companion would
rebuke him with “That is not what I meant at all. / That is not it, at
all’” is muttered by Otto Pivner when Esme seems less than enamored with
him. Otto insists: “Oh, look, that isn’t what I meant. [. . .] That isn’t what
I meant at all.”2 Guests leave a party saying, “Yes, well good night, eh?
Ghood night . . . g00 night, goo night, goo night . . .” (680), just as friends
leave the London pub in The Waste Land: “Goonight Bill, Goonight Lou,
Goonight May. Goonight. / Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight” (II, 170-71).
Someone asks Stanley, “Is it ‘Ils vont prende le train de sept heures’ or de
huit heures’” (182), and the answer may be found in Eliot’s “Lune de Miel”:
“Ils vont prendre le train de huit heures.” Stanley quotes, “It’s ‘birth and
copulation and death’” (193) from “Fragments of an Agon” in Sweeney
Agonistes, while a literary critic disdains “claims of time past and time
future, both contained in this limicolous present” (626), varying the opening of 
The Four Quartets: “Time Present and time past / Are both perhaps present in time future, 
/ And time future contained in time past.”

The “Murmur of maternal lamentation” heard in The Waste Land (1. 368)
metamorphoses into Mount Lamentation, which Wyatt sees from his window while 
he grows up in his father’s New England Parsonage. The most
frequent echo derives from J. Alfred Prufrock, who reassures himself that
“there will be time” to face all that he fears. When Otto asks Esme if she
loves him, she answers, “If there were time” (484), and as Mr. Pivner waits
day after day for Otto to call, “And still, even in sleep, he knew there would
be time” (293). After his wife’s death, Gwyon imagines her protestations
right up to Purgatory: “If there had only been time. [. . .] If only there
were time. [. . .] if you'll only tell me what I should do. . (5), Gwyon
knows there is a lesson in Camilla’s death, but believes “There would be
time” (ibid.) to discover it, and thirty years later he is still muttering the
same refrain (419). Stanley also worries about being summoned to Purgatory 
without enough Preparation. Unlike Mrs. Porter and her daughter
in The Waste Land, he rarely washes, since the “overwhelming question”
is: “Would he have time to wash himself to perfect newness, dress in unworn, 
uncreased garments?” (321).

These examples should not give the impression that Gaddis borrows
liberally and randomly from Eliot; the paraphrases and quotations are part
of the form and substance of The Recognitions. It is as though characters
remarkably familiar. The chamber reverberates with other sounds as well,
but Eliot’s are an essential component. Voices rise out, fleeting but unmistakable, 
as testimony of underlying beauty, calm, and harmony, of (as Basil
Valentine tells Wyatt) the only secret worth knowing. The secret of The
Recognitions is the secret behind the cacophony of The Waste Land and
the knowledge revealed through the harmonies of The Four Quartets.
detect.

For example, in part 1, chapter 1, the third-person point of view cuts
across Paris like a camera, creating a montage from a single evening in
August. As it scans the Right Bank, the Terrace of the Dome, the Pont
d’Auteuil, the Bourse, Montmartre, and the Montrouge Cemetery, part of
’ g Y> Pp