
The Novel of Information Multiplicity

is able to sow dissension in the group, it is because a rift already exists,
it seems to have come about as a result of Paul’s decision to leave the group
As Jan explains to Cartwright:

Paul had opted out, she said, but not because of the big projects d
cussed—a symbolic war on children waged against school buses; or slow
through many collaborators, assembling the parts of two bazookas
Washington rooming house with a roof and shelling the President d
a scheduled lawn function; or simply bombing the White House in o
to precipitate martial law and with it consequences leading to change.
on the contrary, Paul had made a mystic parallel between public political
action and the family firm now so complex in its indirect holdings the
possibly not even Jack had it all in his head. And since effective political
action no longer seemed feasible, Paul had conceived a small community
in New England which would be neither as remote as he had felt hims
to be in that Hebridean hut nor as socially involved as he had really be
both through his power in a movement and through his location so useful
to certain American exiles. (405-406)

But if Paul finds “in stones and stars a calm beyond revolutionary put
pose, beyond even peace and contemplation,” his brief cameo apparent
driving yet another of the taxis Cartwright takes in New York is enough
establish that he can be of little help in Cartwright’s effort to prevent 
terrorist violence planned by the remainder of the group—Chad, Nash,
Cremona, Gene, John, and the Frenchmen. The details remain sketchy by
‘indicate that it will probably include dynamiting one of the Flint was
houses where children may be present as part of a science demonstration
film. Cartwright’s unexpected presence in the adjacent warehouse, where li
and the terrorists discover that Jack has set up video equipment to film
whatever goes on in his own warehouse next door, has the effect of disorienting
the terrorists, and the plan is apparently aborted. The explosion
Cartwright witnesses from the helicopter above Manhattan—“the silent
flash there in the city’s grid” (3) which begins the novel and to which
loop back at its end—turns out to be only a police tow truck dynamited by
Len Incremona. Finally, on the novel’s last page, when Cartwright, with his
friend Sub’s mostly ignorant collaboration, heaves the latter’s new TV set
out of Sub’s apartment window onto Incremona in the street below, the
terrorist network appears to be effectively squelched.

In the context of this seemingly most resolute and definitive of gestures
which concludes the novel, Cartwright’s last words—“I was not sure what
I'd seen but I knew what we had done” (531)—give pointed iteration to
 between perception (“what I had seen”) and what can be
(“what we had done”). But the question all along, both in the novel’s
evaluative structure and in the movement from page to page, has a whether
this gap can indeed be filled and whether this sometimes slight but ever
sent difference can be overcome or transcended through the act of an
uninentional consciousness. In thus asking whether narrative—or mere
proliferation of narratives—can be made to subsume and thus include the
muliltiplicity between what has been seen and what can be made to emerge
explicitly into consciousness, Lookout Cartridge raises pressing questions



 According to the Freudian model, the unconscious process of repression 
operating on the contingencies of memory and childhood experiences
Hence makes it difficult (though not impossible) for the unaided individual
account fully for his or her own experience. Lookout Cartridge is clearly
Hot concerned with the unconscious in this Freudian sense, except perhaps
i. a modified structuralist version (like that of Jacques heaps according to
which the individual always occupies a “subject position by virtue of a
symbolic structure. As Cartwright becomes more and more active we
I knowing subject (or, in Lacanian terms, as “the subject who is supposed to
low”), he comes to recognize the extent to which he is only one of many
“centers” acted on by necessities operating outside and beyond the consciousness 
of any single individual. Moreover, his hyperawareness of how
hie occupies a place in a “multiple system” (439) is charged with 
bath positive and negative valencies. Negatively, his quest reveals how he is hoping
inside someone else’s plan” (280) as a functional part of “someone else’s
system.” Positively, the quest confirms his desire that his own life reflect a
larger life (401), as well as his belief that “you must build yourself into os
life around you” (410). In these terms, Cartwright’s quest both enacts an
tests the senses in which human experience is a collaborative network. .
Nevertheless, an unresolvable tension or contradiction between wanting
to know and wanting to be a part of remains essential to Cartwright are
consciousness. Approaching the end of his quest, he thinks to himself: i
wanted to take home a tale to my family they could understand. But it might
he too late. They were dispersed” (421). This simple, even homely tat
qualifies Cartwright’s final sense of how intricately and on how many levels
he is indeed subsumed into what the Druid calls a “large endless harmony.