
Rather than think of Oswald as a double of himself, as DeLillo puts it in
his Rolling Stone article, it seems more usefully exact tu understand as a
as a simulacrum—a double or copy without an original—who brings together 
many heterogeneous series into resonances Many of these series of items and 
situations have already been enumerated, to which an Oswald himself can now be added. However, and precisely ae f i
Hidell effect, Oswald as a diverse series of appearances cannot be va d
HG any essential core of identity. 

More important, it is through Oswald and Hidell that these diverse series 
in the novel begin to stiverae and comniuncate, rg resonate. Indeed, what
 Ferrie conceives of as coincidence and cil
third line can now be seen to adumbrate an intuitive and somewhat r aN
mentary understanding of this resonance. More obscurely, Libra hints ch i
the medium through which this resonance occurs is constitanted! by th 7
realm of images disseminated by the movies and other mass md ae
In relation to this medium, Libra can be said to function as —_ Gill
Deleuze has called an “intensive system.”** According to Deleuze, a aN
is produced by the sudden convergence and coupling of any cypher of 
indpendent and heterogeneous series. This coupling produces an “internal feed
nuance” in the system, from which derives a forced movement that oweet
through and envelops the various constitutive series. What is immoral
about such a system is that it enables us to conceive of an event in an a
longer defined by the protocols of representation, where bounded matte
or wholes, communicate or are related through their assumed likeness or
identity. By contrast, an event in Deleuze’s sense is instantiated in differences
through which parts or part-objects communicate. In such an intensive system, 
an event is always set off by a simulacrum, which Deleuze calls the
“dark precursor.”

In Libra this is the role of Oswald-Hidell, who as a simulacrum brings
the various ramifying series that make up the novel-as-system into a state of
resonance. Several series unremarked thus far cluster around Kennedy himself and suggest that he too is something of a simulacrum, or a construction
in which Kennedy’s personal identity has been displaced and remade by
mass-media projections and political machinations. When Kennedy arrives
at the Dallas airport—his first appearance in the novel—it soon becomes
evident that the whole point of his visit and participation in the motorcade
is to (re)affirm as real what for most people is only an image. Thus Kennedy
wants “maximum exposure as the ad men say” (393), whereas the crowd
wants to confirm that “he looked like himself, like photographs” (392).
Indeed, the physical presence of the Kennedys literally produces jubilance in
the crowd: “They’re here. It’s them. They're real” (394, DeLillo’s emphases). Earlier in the novel, Kennedy’s photogenic charisma had been linked
explicitly by Banister to the power of secrets: “The man with the secrets
gives off the glow” (141). In fact, Banister believes that Kennedy is always
accompanied by ten or fifteen look-alikes, multiplying his appearance as a
diversionary precaution. But Banister’s response is only a symptomatic reaction to Kennedy’s potent multiplication and transmission as a mass-media
image, comparable in that to Marina Oswald’s feeling that Kennedy “floats
over the landscape at night, entering dreams and fantasies” (324).

In his Rolling Stone article, DeLillo rejects the idea that Oswald is Kennedy’s “secret sharer” (in the Conradian sense) with whom he enters into a
“mysterious communication.” However, as simulacra, Oswald and KenCfogeneous series that define the assassination as an event in the Deleuzian
Sse. That this communication cannot be conceived in representational
ferms points to its complexity, which exceeds the parameters of historical
thinking without invoking extrahistorical elements. What is different, of
course, is the configuration of elements and the space of their articulation.

This Deleuzian conception of the event both accords with DeLillo’s expressed interest in devices and diagrammatic structures and provides a philosophical basis for certain statements) DeLillo has made concerning his interest in systems. For example, ‘nthe interview cited earlier, he makes the