

—Did you man? glue that quarter there? 
—Man like who’s supposed to_know piéta I mean...
—Told you tale, tale . . . pages flapped under his hand —for tho’ 

—Didn’t Christ! didn’t say pieta whole God damned different Christ the tale left 
right here for though the God damned eyes wipe his « any God damned use look, 
book don’t bring a God damned thing to itwave his stick figure out what the hell he, 
for though, for now the peasant take a God damned thing from it don’t know something 
look it up where’s a pencil God damned clauses look just turned around p no God damned 
obligation encyclopedia right here look it up ag, ag, glass
quick... golf wrong God damned volume .. .

—Look man I mean it doesn’t mat...

—You did didn’t you man, you glued it didn’t you . . . “lf

—Whole God damned point doesn’t matter why agapé’s agape,

——Clauses turn right around look. For now long after Wilde
withdrawn to join the compost smoldering in Europe with Pater’s 
reel whole God damned point just look up something else Gordian Knot the,
for success in life, the tale how for art’s sake he’d faced Leadville’s 
bulli casual bowser look up Gordian Knot the. Known as Chinese Gordon for
to a standoff continued to amuse here where invention was
 his brilliant military exploits in that country, Charles George Gordon
the very possibility of failure as a condition for success precisely in 
later undertook the heroic defense of Khartoum where the knot that
arts where one’s best is never good enough and who, now the song woul bears his name of Christ! —
play on without losing a note, could resist the temptation to shoot #! —Look out! you.could have broke the window man I mean Chairpianist? How’s that. il man Meow you scared the shit out of him here kitty, I mean like why’d
—How’s what. Look man I mean... i you throw it at him man here kitty kitty . . .
—What don’t like it? ji —Whole God, damned, try to tell you tell them too God damned late
—No I mean I don’t get it, like I mean I don’t even understand I love feast all over shoot the God damned pianist doesn’t matter laughing

—God damned problem not read to be written aloud you read string whereon mad fingers place of stone Christ, feel like I was born
then start here read it, here. here...

—What like here? The only rat, rational method of art criticism —Man look out that’s my leg...
have ever come across Wilde had observed, now elsewhere and dead, I —God damned many years worth doing God damned eyes follow
mildewed chimp, and Ste... f you start to hate him still waiting shake his God damned stick nothing
—Chump God damn it says chump not chimp, here .. . happen, bandage dry up falls off milk sour world go by out in the God
—It says chimp man look chimp, chi... 4 damned sunshine friends finally too God damned embarrassed to ask,
—Chump mildewed chump think Crane call Wilde a God damn come back open the God damned door right where you hate him God
chimp? damned eyes staring out see where he was going thought you were
—Man how do I look out, I mean that’s my ankle . . . taking him see what you don’t .. .
—Chimp make it sound stupid don’t you, hate it try to make it soun —Look out man sit up I mean you're hurting my, here kitty . . .
stupid... , —Move a clause plump the God damned pillow doesn’t matter wave
—Hate it man like how can I hate it I mean I don’t even know what his stick doesn’t matter cut a paragraph hands on his God damned throat
it’s about... squeeze the whole God damned thing down to a period hate it!
—Shoot the God damned pianist what it’s about just told you, playe —Wait don’t man I mean you're tearing...
piano play by itself get to shoot the pianist just read it God damn it say! —Ten years late staggers out God damned pianist already shot God
it right here, here where invention was eliminating every possibility damned sunshine everybody step right over him God damned hurry go
of failure as_a condition for success precisely in the God damned art noplace nobody give a God damn book everything’s happened book
there, says it right there. 7 ys it right there. about everybody knows hate it!

—It says what, I mean this player piano where does it say that. } —Man like that’s what people want’s books that tell them what they
—Invention says right there invention God damn it means player already know, I mean that’s why they’re all such bullshit get my foot out
piano... of under your, ow . . . she drew its moccasined heel up hung on the sofa’s
—Man I mean that’s what I mean, like I mean if it says it why doesn't edge her fallen leg’s length from his perch there on H-O —like I mean

it say it? And I mean this is the name of the book agape agape? that’s the _look at all the i oks in thi who asked you to write another
name of it? one anyhow.
5 ——e—ee i]