

rather at its highest intensification, this fact cannot fail
to influence human consciousness. All other things are
lost to a mind thus enthralled; all bridges between the
concrete datum and the systematized totality of experience 
are broken; only the present reality, as mythic or
linguistic conception stresses and shapes it, fills 
the entire subjective realm. So this one content of experience
must reign over practically the whole experiential world.
There is nothing beside or beyond it whereby it could be
measured or to which it could be compared; its mere
presence is the sum of all Being. At this point, the word
which denotes that thought content is not a mere conventional 
symbol, but is merged with its object in an
indissoluble unity. The conscious experience is not
merely wedded to the word, but is consumed by it.
Whatever has been fixed by a name, henceforth is not
only real, but is Reality. The potential between “symbol”
and “meaning” is resolved; in place of a more or less
adequate “expression,” we find a relation of identity, of
complete congruence between “image” and “object,”
between the name and the thing.

From another angle, too, we may observe and elucidate this 
substantial embodiment which the spoken
word undergoes: for the same sort of hypostatization or
transubstantiation occurs in other realms of mental
creativity; indeed, it seems to be the typical process in
all unconscious ideation. All cultural work, be it technical 
or purely intellectual, proceeds by the gradual shift
from the direct relation between man and his environment to an indirect relation. In the beginning, sensual
impulse is followed immediately by its gratification; but
gradually more and more mediating terms intervene
between the will and its object. It is as though the will,
in order - to_gain_its_end,_had_to-move_away from the
goal instead of toward it; instead of a simple reaction,
almost in the nature of a reflex, to bring the object into
reach, it requires a differentiation of behavior, covering
a wider class of objects, so that finally the sum total of
all these acts, by the use of various “means,” may realize
the desired end.

In the realm of technical achievement this increasing
mediation may be seen in the invention and use of tools.
But here, again, it may be observed that as soon as man
employs a tool, he views it not as a mere artifact of which
he is the recognized maker, but as_a Being in its own
right, endowed with powers of its own. Instead of ‘Being
governed by his will, it becomes a god or daemon on
whose will he depends—to which he feels himself subjected, 
and which he adores with the mites of a religious
cult. Especially the ax and the hammer seem to have
attained such religious significance in earliest times;*°
but the cult of other implements, too, such as the hoe
or the fishhook, the spear or the sword, may be found to
this day among primitive peoples. Among the Evé the
smith’s hammer (Zu) is deemed a mighty deity whom
they worship and to whom they make sacrifices.*® And
even in Greek religion and Greek classical literature the
sentiment that prompts such a cult often finds direct
expression. As an example of this, Usener has drawn attention 
to a passage in the Seven against Thebes of
Aeschylos, in which Parthenopacus swears by his spear,
which he *' onors above god, and above his e yes,” to destroy Thebes. 
“Life and Victory depend upon direction
and power, as also on the good will of the weapon; this
feeling wells up irresistibly in the crucial moment of the
