

The sinews tighten, and the gathered strength
Of all his body strains his arm in vain;

Poison o’ercomes him; wounded sore he groans.
The other serpent now with sudden glide
Returned, darts under him its shiny length,
Entwines his knees below and binds them fast.
The knees press outward, and the leg compressed
By tightening windings swells; the blood confined
Chokes up the vitals and swells black the veins.
His sons no less the same wild strength attacks,
And strangles them with swift embrace and tears
Their little limbs; e’en now the gory breast

Of one whose dying voice his father calls
Has been its pasture; round him wrap its coils
And crush him in the mighty winding folds.
The other boy, unhurt, unbitten yet,
Uplifts his foot to unloose the serpent’s tail;
His father’s anguish seen he stands aghast,
Transfixed with horror—his loud wailings stay,
His falling teardrops stay—in double dread.

Then, ye, the makers of so great 2 work,
Great workmen, still in lasting fame renowned
(Although by better deeds a deathless name
Is sought, although to some ‘twas given to leave
A higher talent far to coming: glory).

Tis noble still to seize what chance is given
For praise, and strive the highest peak to gain.
Tis yours with living shapes to quicken stone,
To give hard marble feeling till it breathes,
We gaze upon the passion, anger, pain,

We all but hear the groans, so great your skill,
You famous Rhodes of old extolled. Long time
The graces of your art lay low; again

Rome sees them in a new day’s kindly light,
She honours them with many a looker on,
And on the ancient work new charms are shed.

“[THE POEM OF JACOB SADOLE ; ON THE STATUE OF LAOCOON

From mighty heaped-up mound of earth and from the heart
mighty ruins, lo! long time once more
as brought Laocoon home, who stood of old
Princely palaces and graced thy halls
Titus. Wrought by skill divine
we learned ancients saw no nobler work),
Statue now from darkness saved returns
W]stronghold of Rome's second life.
be it all begin and what shall end my lay?
be hapless father and his children twain?
snakes of aspect dire in winding coils?

Then better far by talent or by toil

The mind cone” though but marble, dies? : To increase the span of fate, than still increase
Ind recoils and pity’s self appalled, Or pride or wealth or empty luxury.
