In the ancient wars everyone was exposed to that. 
How did it happen, then, that it had such
simply by the poisoned arrow
terrible consequences only in the case of Philoctetes? 
Besides,  a natural poison that works for nine whole years without
Killing the victim is far more improbable than all the fabulous
wonders with which the Greek dramatist decked out his piece!

 However great and terrible he made the physical pain
of his hero, Sophocles still knew full well that it was 
in itself not enough to excite any appreciable degree of pity. 
He therefore combined it with other ills which likewise could not in
themselves greatly move us, but which receive from this combination a 
coloring just as melancholy as that which they in
their turn impart to physical pain. Th
\ I isolation from human society,
life to which one is exposed i
in a raw climate.“ 

hunger, and all the hardships of n such a state of privation 
and man in these circumstances, but give him health, strength, and energy, and he becomes a 
Robinson Crusoe whose fate, although it lays little claim to our
sympathy, does not leave us indifferent. For we are rarely so
satisfied with human society that the quiet we enjoy without it
does not have a special appeal to us, particularly in view of
the notion—so flattering to every individual—that he can gradually learn to do without the help of others. On the other
hand, imagine a man with the most painful, incurable disease
but at the same time surrounded by kind friends, who see to
it that he does not lack anything, who ease his suffering as
much as they can, and to whom he may openly complain and
lament. We undoubtedly feel sympathy for such a man, but
our sympathy does not last; in the end we shrug our shoul
and admonish him to be patient. It is only when both
dicaments are combined—when the isolated individual has no
*~ control over his own body and when the sick man neither re-
Iecives help from others nor is able to help himself, and his
laments are wasted on the desert air—it is then that we see

ders
pre-

gain on the same path of suffering. But

ary result could one expect from I

CHAPTER FOUR

er the unevery misery that can beset the human ae wee dng fortunate man’s head, and only then ae rit drend, We
putting ourselves in his situation excite A ne city fe go oso,
we despair in its most terrifying form, ane we) is mingled
jione melts our very soul so much as t ~~ Sor Fidlonvetes,
with despair. This is the kind of pity we nit, when hé 4¢ deand we feel it most strongly at the mome one hmotaeia
jrived of his bow, the only thing that could s
pte. ho hadn't
Oh, the folly of the Frenchman [Chateaubewal ta ‘xl
ihe sense to consider this Mookie te - soar taste cf ies
sacrific ‘
- re eaten provides his Philoctetes swith, company
a rincess come to him on his desert island; an .
ae eon lone! her lady-in-waiting is with her, and a i"
know who needed her most, princess or ~~ eee up for
the whole splendid scene with the bow, No deuibt awe andl
this he introduces the play of pretty <7o% the heroic French
arrows would have seemed a comic sport to ee ean ean abcs
youth, but nothing could be more serious o na bonathile
scorn of lovely eyes. The Greek harrows us with t fhe vesert
fea that poor Philoctetes will have to aa a The
island without his bow and perish miserably om
Frenchmair KHOWs 3 Surer Way to our hearts; he r. =“ we eas
that the son of Achilles will have to march ove called hie
princess. As might be expected, head Parisian c them suggested
“triumphing over the ancients, and one. va salad wait
that Chateaubrun’s piece be called “La di Te ebay marens to
ing considered the effect of the whole, a
® prs in which Philoctetes no longer appears a ‘
Meee oned ick man, but has hopes of leaving the bleak eser
es ete to his kingdom; that is to say, in me
7 his entire misfortune is restricted to his pain
scenes Mite moans, he shrieks, he falls into the moe ae convulsions. It is against this that sekaiees Widusa smith]
decorum is justly raised; it is an Englishm

r e, April, 1755, p. 177.
2 (“Difficulty overcome.”] Mercure de France, Ap
TC iin