New Classes of Objects

The Time Class

What’s the story with this Time class? Time objects represent (you guessed it)
moments in time. You can add (or subtract) numbers to (or from) times to get
few times; adding 1.5 to a time makes a new time one-and-a-half seconds
later:

Time = Time.new # The moment we ran this code.
Time2 = time + 60 # One minute later.

its time

its time2

You can also make a time for a specific moment using Time.local:

its Time.local(2000, 1, 1) # Y2K,
its Time. local(1976, 8, 3, 13, 31) # When I was born.

pull notice the in these times. That’s to account for the
reference between the local time and Greenwich mean time (GMT, the One
rue Time Zone, dontcha know). This can be because of being in a different
me zone or daylight saving time or who knows what else. So, you can see
I was born in daylight saving time, while it was not daylight saving time
hen Y2K struck. (By the way, the parentheses are to group the parameters
local together; otherwise, puts might start thinking those are its parameters.)
he more parameters you add to local, the more accurate your time becomes.


You can compare times using the comparison methods (an earlier time is less
an a later time), and if you subtract one time from another, you'll get the
Amber of seconds between them. Play around with it!

you happen to be using an older version of Ruby, there’s this problem with
The Time class. It thinks the world began at epoch: the stroke of midnight,
iuary 1, 1970, GMT. I don’t really know of any satisfying way of explaining

12.3

this, but here goes: at some point, probably before I way
people (Unix folks, I believe) decided that a good way tu
computers was to count the number of seconds since {1
the 70s. So, time “zero” stood for the birth of thal grew
called it epoch. '

Now this was all long before Ruby. In those ancient diy:
in those ancient languages), you often had to worry al
getting too large. In general, a number would either be I
billion or be from -2 billion to +2 billion, depending on hi
store it. il

For whatever reasons (compatibility, tradition, cruelly, wl
sions of Ruby decided to go with these conventions, So (ati
tant point), you couldn’t have times more than 2 billion
epoch! This restriction wasn’t too painful, though, been
sometime in December 1901 to sometime in January 20M


A Few Things to Try

¢ One billion seconds! Find out the exact second you
Figure out when you will turn (or perhaps when I
seconds old. Then go mark your calendar.

* Happy birthday! Ask what year a person was hort)
and then the day. Figure out how old they are, and ji
for each birthday they have had.

The Hash Class ot

Another useful class is the Hash class. Hashes are a lol I
a bunch of slots that can point to various objects, How
slots are lined up in a row, and each one is numbere

In a hash, the slots aren't in a row (they are just sor i