

How could we be capable of forgetting the old
myths that stand at the threshold of all mankind,
myths of dragons transforming themselves at the
last moment into princesses? Perhaps all dragons in
our lives are really princesses just waiting to see us
just once being beautiful and courageous. Perhaps
everything fearful is basically helplessness that
seeks our help.

You must not be frightened, dear Mr. Kappus,
when a sadness arises within you of such magnitude 
as you have never experienced, or when restlessness 
overshadows all you do, like light and the
shadow of clouds gliding over your hand. You must
believe that something is happening to you, that life
has not forgotten you, that it holds you in its hand.
It shall not let you fall.

Why should you want to exclude any anxiety,
any grief, any melancholy from your life, since
you do not know what it is that these conditions
are accomplishing in you? Why do you want to
persecute yourself with the question of where
everything comes from and where it is headed?

You do know that you are in a period of transition
and wish for nothing as much as to transform
yourself. If some aspect of your life is not well,
then consider the illness to be the means for an
organism to free itself from something foreign to
it. In that case you must help it to be ill and to
have its whole illness, to let it break out. That is
the course of its progress.

So much is happening within you at present,
dear Mr. Kappus. You need to be as patient as
someone ill and as optimistic as one recuperating,
for perhaps you are both. And more: You are also
the physician who must watch over yourself. But
in the course of every illness there are many days
in which the physician can do nothing but wait.
And that, above all, to the extent that you are your
physician, you must do now.

Do not scrutinize yourself too closely. Do not
draw conclusions too quickly from that which
is happening to you. Just allow it to happen.
Otherwise you might easily begin to look with
blame (that is, morally speaking) upon your past,
which, of course, is very much a part of everything 
that you encounter now. The influences of
the vagaries, the wishes and the longings of your
boyhood upon your present life are not the ones