
Climbing down from the St Louis high followed by the savoury of Notre
Dame with just time at home between courses to wash out some shirts & cali
desperate Max the cat, & wade through the otherwise trash heap of mail for The
Living End: & it certainly is!

Why do we write? out of indignation? outrage? I had thought of pursuing
that theme at Notre Dame & planned to pack along Mark Twain’s Mysterious
Stranger for the purpose till I read yours & thought ah! here’s the news! And
only on the plane, culling for inspired passages (He doesn’t accept invitations,
He doesn’t go out. He stays home nights.’) did it occur to me that this was
hardly the forum, hardly my place to divert them from the medium to the
message as it would inevitably be interpreted, & so I desisted not, I hope, from
cowardice, but . . . what, delicacy? That & trying not to ride (living) coat tails,
my next note on these lines to John Macrae III at Dutton explaining I don’t
think blurbs sell books any more than reviews do & I’ve never got past the
feeling that so many of them are sheer self-advertisement on someone else’s
jacket (what keeps the Kazins of this world alive?): God knows I thought of
sending Dutton something like “A delicately evocative novel which urges us
to lay aside our fears and realize our true strength” but that seemed hazardous
for a number of reasons, so I’ve retired to the notion (which I do embrace)
that all that sells books, movies & similar aberrations is word-of-mouth & I’ve
a busy one as you know; anyhow I can’t believe the book won’t be taken up
immediately as slamming the door that Twain opened on eschatology once [oj
all, its street wit is marvelous & its brevity admirable.

All this backing & filling scarcely seems an expression of my real & lastingly,
thanks for all your generosity on every level while I was there, the whole thing
helped to restore a feeling of having a place in this world which it seems to like
 more than the publication of a book to deprive me of permanently. I noticed
wal you seem to get around a good deal & if anything brings you east I'd hope

ii Would call, granted I don’t lay a table in a class with Joan’s but the will &
ie drink would be there; or even if you were just in New York itself P’d race in
ii Visit.

thanks again to Joan for feeding me &
carting me around & my best to you both,


 Dick,

_ I'm just finally getting my head together from St. Louis-followed-by-Notre
me: it’s all enough to seduce one permanently from the drudgery of the
hoard to the parade circuit, given the generosity that greeted me everywhere;
Ines seem a generation since we cowered under that Arch & ate Mexican & I
Thank you for all of it. Including dinner with your bright girls: whatever fooleries
one has committed along the way it often seems (to me, having
this far) that a great deal is redeemed if one can point to one’s kids with
here at least is something I did right . . . Do thank them again for me.
That evening brings up another, or rather the only point left unresolved
ion I fled town. You recall I'd thought we were in for a 35-mile drive both
4 for dinner which I looked for as a chance to get at the movies in general &
1 stab in particular, so failing that dialogue all you have is this mono . . .
don’t know who isn’t knowledgably down on that whole scene these days as
more & more the closed province of fewer & fewer, & breaking into it
ler every day, from the packaging nightmare on the one hand to the superjet
/super profits approach on the other. Any cheerful doubts on these lines
ight have had were certainly dispelled when I met & talked at some length

Larry McMurtry at Notre Dame. His prescription for a ‘property’ (in the
disappearing low-budget class): ‘a small flat book with a strong narrative
for example, The Last Picture Show, though his luck in the industry
hasn’t been all that great either, considering numbers of works optioned,
pls written, films unproduced.