

the whole length of her and then her warmth. An earlier lust came
back and his arm went over her so that his hand held her breast—
full there but too soft, like something over-ripe that would soon go bad.

He wanted to wake her and take her again but as he thought about
this a sad feeling rose up and forbade it. The more he hesitated the
more the sadness grew. He would like to know her better. He’d had
a feeling all night that he had seen her before somewhere, a long
time ago,

‘That thought seemed to bring it all down. Now the sadness came
on in full and blended with the darkness of the cabin and with the
dim indigo light through the hatch above. Up there were stars, framed
by the hatch opening so that they seemed to move when the boat
rocked. Part of Orion momentarily disappeared, then appeared again.
Soon all the winter constellations would be back.

Cars rolling over a bridge in the distance sounded clearly through
the cold night air. They were on their way to Kingston, somewhere
on the bluffs above, over the Hudson River. ‘The boat was berthed
here in this tiny creek for a night’s rest on the way south.

There was not much time. There was almost no green left in the
trees along the river. Many of the turned leaves had already fallen.
During these last few days, gusts of cold wind had swept down the
river valley from the north, swirling the leaves up off their branches
into the air in sudden spiraling flights of red and maroon and gold
and brown across the water of the river into the path of the boat as
it moved down the buoyed channel. There had been hardly any other
boats in the channel. A few boats at docks along the riverbank seemed
abandoned and forlorn now that summer had ended and their owners
had turned to other pursuits. Overhead the V’s of ducks and geese
had been everywhere, flying down on the north wind from the Canadian arctic. 
Many of them must have been just ducklings and goslings when he first began this voyage from the inland ocean of Lake
Superior, a thousand miles behind him now and what seemed like a
thousand years ago.

There was not much time. Yesterday when he first went up on
deck his foot slipped and he caught himself and then he saw the '
entire boat was covered with ice.


Phaedrus wondered where he had seen Lila before, but he didn’t
know. It seemed as though he had seen her, though. It was autumn
then too, he thought, November, and it was very cold. He remembered 
the streetcar was almost empty except for him and the motorman 
and the conductor and Lila and her girlfriend sitting back three
seats behind him. The seats were yellow woven rattan, hard and
tough, designed for years of wear, and then a few years later the
busses replaced them and the tracks and overhead cables and the
streetcars were all gone.

He remembered he*had seen three movies in a row and smoked
too many cigarettes and had a bad headache and it was still about
half an hour of pounding along the tracks before the streetcar would
let him off and then he would have a block and a half through the
dark to get home where there would be some aspirin and it would
be about an hour and a half after that before the headache would go
away. ‘Then he heard these two girls giggle very loudly and he turned
to see what it was. They stopped very suddenly and they looked at
him in such a way that there could have been only one thing they
were giggling at. It was him. He had a big nose and poor posture and
wasn’t anything to look at, and tended to relate poorly to other people.
‘The one on the left who looked like she had been giggling the loudest
was Lila. The same face, exactly—gold hair and smooth complexion
and blue eyes—with a smothered smile she probably thought covered
up what she was laughing at. They got off a couple of blocks later,
still talking and laughing.

A few months later he saw her again in a downtown rush-hour
crowd. It happened in a moment and then it was over. She turned
her head and he saw in her face that she recognized him and she
seemed to pause, waiting for him to do something, say something.
But he didn’t act. He didn’t have that skill of relating quickly to
people, and then it was too late, somehow, and they each went on
and he wondered for a long time that afternoon, and for days after
that, who she was and what it would have been like if he had gone
over and said something. The next summer he thought he saw her
at a bathing beach in the south part of the city. She was lying in the
sand so that when he walked past her he saw her face upside down
and he was suddenly very excited. This time he wouldn’t just stand