
so that the gods were conceived as preserving the world not merely
from physical disorder but also from moral chaos. The one idea is
implicit in the other: and there is order in the universe because its
control is in righteous hands. . . .”

The physical order of the universe is also the moral order of the
universe. Rra is both. This was exactly what the Metaphysics of
Quality was claiming. It was not a new idea. It was the oldest idea
known to man.

This identification of arta and areté was enormously valuable,
Phaedrus thought, because it provided a huge historical Panorama in
which the fundamental conflict between static and Dynamic Quality
had been worked out. It answered the question of why areté meant
ritual. Rv@ also meant ritual. But unlike the Greeks, the Hindus in
their many thousands of years of cultural evolution had paid enormous
attention to the conflict between ritual and freedom. Their resolution
of this conflict in the Buddhist and Vedantist philosophies is one of
the profound achievements of the human mind.

The original meaning of z7a, during what is called the Brahmana
period of Indian history, underwent a change to extremely ritualistic
static patterns more rigid and detailed than anything heard of in Western 
religion. As Hiriyanna wrote,

The purpose of invoking the several gods of nature was at first
mostly to gain their favor for success in life here as well hereafter.
The prayers were then naturally accompanied by simple gifts like grain
and ghee. But this simple form of worship became more and more
complicated and gave rise, in course of time, to elaborate Sacrifices
and also to a special class of professional priests who Glone, it was
believed, could officiate at them. T) here are allusions in the later hymns
Lo rites which lasted for very long periods and at which several priests
were employed by the sacrificer. [A change] came over the Spirit with
which offerings were made to the ods in this period. What prompted
the performance of sacrifices was no longer the thought of prevailing
upon the gods to bestow some favor or ward off some danger; it was
rather to compel or coerce them to do what the sacrificer wanted to
be done... . 7

There was a profound change in the conception of sacrifice, and
consequently in that of the relation between gods and men. All that
came to be insisted upon was a scrupulous carrying out of every detail
connected with the various rites: and the good result accruing from
them, whether here or elsewhere, was believed to follow automatically
From it... . Ritualistic punctilio thus comes to be placed on the same
level as natural law and moral rectitude.

You don’t have to look far in the modern world to find similar
conditions, Phadrus thought.

But what made the Hindu experience so profound was that this
decay of Dynamic Quality into static quality was not the end of the
story. Following the period of the Brahmanas came the Upanisadic
period and the flowering of Indian philosophy. Dynamic Quality 
reemerged within the static patterns of Indian thought.
“Rra,” Hiriyanna had written, “almost ceased to be used in Sanskrit; 
but. . . under the name of dharma, the same idea occupies a
very important place in the later Indian views of life also.”

The more usual meaning of dharma is, “religious merit which,
operating in some unseen Way as it is supposed, secures good to a
person in the future, either here or elsewhere. Thus the performance
of certain sacrifices is believed to lead the agent to heaven after the
present life, and of certain others to secure for him wealth, children
and the like in this very life.”

But he also wrote, “It is sometimes used as a purely moral concept
and stands for right or virtuous conduct which leads to some form of
good as a result.”

Dharma, like ta, means “‘what holds together.” It is the basis of
all order. It equals righteousness. It is the ethical code. It is the stable
condition which gives man perfect satisfaction.

Dharma is duty. It is not external duty which is arbitrarily imposed
by others. It is not any artificial set of conventions which can be
amended or repealed by legislation. Neither is it internal duty which
is arbitrarily decided by one’s own conscience. Dharma is beyond all
questions of what is internal and what is external. Dharma is Quality
itself, the principle of “rightness” which gives structure and purpose
to the evolution of all life and to the evolving understanding of the
universe which life has created.