

is this world right here and now, in which you see life around you
but can’t Participate in it. You’re forever a stranger from your own
life because there’s something in your life that holds you back. You
see others bathing in the life all around them while you have to drink
it through a straw, never getting enough.

You would think that fame and fortune would bring a sense of
closeness to other people, but quite the opposite happens. You split
into two people, who they think you are and who you really are, and
that produces the Zen hell.

It’s like a hall of mirrors at a Carnival where some mirrors distort
you one way and some distort you another. Already he’d seen three
completely different mirror reflections this week: from Rigel, who
reflected an image of some kind of moral degenerate; from Lila, who
reflected a tedious old nerd; and now Redford who was probably going
to cast him into some sort of heroic image.

Each person you come to is a different mirror. And since you’re
Just another person like them maybe you’re just another mirror too,
and there’s no way of ever knowing whether your own view of yourself
is just another distortion. Maybe all you ever see is reflections. Maybe
mirrors are all you ever get. First the mirrors of your parents, then
friends and teachers, then bosses and officials, priests and ministers,
and maybe writers and painters too. That’s their job too, holding up
mirrors.

But what controls all these mirrors is the culture: the Giant, the
gods; and if you run afoul of the culture it will start throwing up
I reflections that try to destroy you, or it will withdraw the mirrors and
{ try to destroy you that way. Phaedrus could see how this celebrity
could get to be like some sort of narcosis of mirrors where you have
to have more and more supportive reflections just to Stay satisfied.
The mirrors take over your life and soon you don’t know who you
are. Then the culture controls you and when it takes away your mirrors
and the public forgets you the withdrawal symptoms start to appear,
And there you are, in the Zen hell of celebrity... . Hemingway with
the top of his head blown off, and Presley, full of Prescription drugs,
The endless dreary exploitation of Marilyn Monroe. Or any of dozens
of others. It seemed like it was the celebrity, the mirrors of the “gods,”
that did it.


A subject-object metaphysics presumes that all these mirrors are
subjective and therefore unreal and unimportant, but that presumption, 
like so many others, seems to deliberately ignore the obvious.

It ignores the phenomenon of someone like Redford walking down
the street and observing that people, in his own words, “goon out”
when they see him. His manager said it’s almost impossible for him
to attend public meetings because when people see he’s there they
all turn around and watch Aim.

Phzedrus remembered that he himself had started to “goon out”
when Redford came to the door. All that Charlie Chaplin stuff with
the coat. What is this “‘goon-out” phenomenon? It was no subjective
illusion. It’s a very real primary reality, an empirical perception.

It seems to have biological roots, like hunger or fear or greed. Is
it similar to stage fright? There seems to be a loss of real-time awareness. 
A fixed image of the famous person, like the Sundance Kid,
seems to overwhelm the Dynamic real-time person who exists in the
moment of confrontation. That’s why Phaedrus had so much trouble
getting started.

But there is much more than that.

This whole business of celebrity also had something perceptibly
degenerate about it. Vulgar and degenerate and enormously fascinating 
and at times obsessive, very much in the same way that sex
seemed to be vulgar and degenerate at some times, and enormously
fascinating and obsessive.

Sex and celebrity. Before Phaedrus got his boat and cleared out
of Minnesota he remembered ladies at parties coming over to rub up
against him. A teenage girl squealing in ecstasy at one of his lectures.
A woman broadcasting executive grabbing his arm at lunch and saying,
“I must have you. I mean you.” You’d think he was a sandwich or
something. For forty years he’d wondered what it took, that he was
so obviously lacking, that made women look at you twice. Was celebrity it? 
Was that all? He thought there was more to it than that.

There’s a parallel there, he thought. There’s something slightly
obscene about the whole celebrity feeling. It’s that same feeling you
get from sex magazines on the newsstands. There’s something troubling
about seeing those magazines there. And yet if you thought no
one would notice you might want to take a look in those magazines,