But intellect and society are still fighting it out, 
and that is the key to an understanding of both the
Victorians and the twentieth century.

What distinguishes the pattern of values called Victorian from the
post-World War I period that followed it is, according to the Metaphysics 
of Quality, a cataclysmic shift in levels of static value; an
earthquake in values, an earthquake of such enormous consequence
that we are still stunned by it, so stunned that we haven’t yet figured
out what has happened to us. 

The advent of both democratic and communistic socialism and the 
fascist reaction to them has been the consequence of this earthquake. 
The whole “Lost Generation” of the twentieth century which continues, 
as lost as ever, through generation after generation, is a consequence of it. 

The twentieth century collapse of morals is a consequence of it. 
Further consequences are on their way.

What distinguishes the Victorian culture from the culture of today
is that the Victorians were the last people to believe that patterns of
intellect are subordinate to patterns of society. What held the Victorian
pattern together was a social code, not an intellectual one. They called
it morals, but really it was just a social code. As a code it was just
like their ornamental cast-iron furniture: expensive looking, cheaply
made, brittle, cold, and uncomfortable.

The new culture that has emerged is the first in history to believe
that patterns of society must be subordinate to patterns of intellect.
‘The one dominating question of this century has been, “Are the social
patterns of our world going to run our intellectual life, or is our 
intellectual life going to run the social patterns?” And in that battle,
the intellectual patterns have won.

Now, with that illumination, all sorts of things clear up. The reason
the Victorians sound so superficial and hypocritical to us today is
because of this gulf in values. Even though they were our ancestors
they were another very different culture. Trying to understand a
member of another culture is impossible without taking into account
differences in value. If a Frenchman asks, “How can Germans stand
to live the way they do?” he will get no answer as long as he applies
French values to the question. If aGerman asks, “How can the French
stand to live the way they do?” he will get no answer as long as he
applies German values to the question. When we ask how could the
Victorians stand to live in the hypocritical and superficial way they
did, we cannot get a useful answer as long as we superimpose on
them twentieth century values that they did not have.

If one realizes that the essence of the Victorian value pattern was
an elevation of society above everything else, then all sorts of things
fall into place. What we today call Victorian hypocrisy was not regarded
as hypocrisy. It was a virtuous effort to keep one’s thoughts within
the limits of social propriety. In the Victorian’s mind quality and
intellectuality were not related to one another in such a way that
quality 4ad to stand the test of intellectual meaning. The test of
anything in the Victorian mind was, “Does society approve?”

To put social forms to the test of intellectual value was “ungracious,”’ 
and those Victorians really did believe in the social graces.
They valued them as the highest attributes of civilization. ““Grace”’
is an interesting word with an important history, and the fact that
they used it the way they did makes it even more interesting. A “‘state
of grace” as defined by the Calvinists was a state of religious ‘“‘enlightenment.” 
But by the time the Victorians were through with it,
“grace” had changed from “godliness” to mean something close to
“social polish.”

To the early Calvinists and to ourselves too this debasement of
the word seems outrageous, but it becomes understandable when one
sees that within the Victorian pattern of values society was God. As
Edith Wharton said, Victorians feared scandal worse than they feared
disease. They had lost their faith in the religious values of their
ancestors and put their faith in society instead. It was only by wearing
the corset of society that one kept oneself from lapsing back into a
condition of evil. Formalism and prudery were attempts to suppress
evil by denying it a place in one’s “higher” thoughts, and for the
Victorian, higher spiritually meant higher socially. There was no 
distinction between the two. ‘God is a gentleman through and through,
and in all probability, Episcopal too.”’ To be a gentleman was as close
as you would ever get, while on earth, to God.

All this explains why Victorian robber barons in America aped
European aristocracy in ways that seem so ludicrous to us today. It
explains why it was so fashionable for Victorian nabobs to pay large