

suspended over the side of the boat and lowered it gently so that its
transom didn’t go under. Then he got in, unsnapped it from the
halyard, and by hand-over-handing along the boat gunwale, worked
it to the stern of the boat.

He took off his shirt, lay flat in the dinghy and reached down with
his hand into the water until it almost was up to his shoulder. It was
cold! He felt around but there didn’t seem to be plastic bags or other
debris covering the engine intake. Bad news. He pulled his arm back
up again and wiped it dry on his shirt.

He supposed whatever it was could have dropped off after the
engine stopped, while he was sailing. He should have run the engine
for a while before he got into the dinghy to see if it was still happening.
You always think of these things too late. Too much other stuff on
his mind.

He tied the dinghy to a stanchion and got aboard. He went back
to the cockpit and started the engine. While it was warming up he
began to think about Lila again.

She’s what you could call a “contrarian.” “You're a loner, just like
me,” she had said the day they left Kingston. That stuck in his mind
because it was true. But what she meant by it was not just someone
who’s alone, but a contrarian, someone who’s always doing everything
the wrong way, just out of pure willfulness, it would seem.

Contrarians sometimes just seem to savagely attack every kind of
Static moral pattern they can find. It seems as though they’re trying
to destroy morality as a kind of revenge.

He’d gotten that word out of his anthropology reading. It indicated
there’s more to contrarians than just individual “wrongness.” It’s
common to many cultures. That brujo in Zuni was a contrarian. The
Cheyenne had a whole society of contrarians to assimilate the phenomenon 
within their social fabric. Cheyenne contrarians rode their
horses sitting backward, entered teepees backward, and had a whole
repertoire of things they performed in a contrary way. Members
seemed to enter the contrary society when they felt a great wrong, a
great injustice, had been done to them and apparently it was felt that
this was a way of resolving the injustice,

Once you see it in another culture like that and then come back
to our own you can see that in an unofficial way we have our contrarian
societies too. The “Bohemians” of the Victorian era were contrarians.
So, to some extent, were the Hippies of the sixties.

... The engine didn’t seem to be overheating now. Maybe the
problem was gone? . . . Hah—not very likely... . Probably it was
just because the engine was in neutral and wasn’t working very hard.
Phzedrus shifted into reverse to let it tug against the anchor for a
while. He waited and watched the temperature dial. . . .

Anyway it seemed to him that when you add a concept of “Dynamic Quality” 
to a rational understanding of the world, you can add
a lot to an understanding of contrarians. Some of them aren’t just
being negative toward static moral patterns, they are actively pursuing
a Dynamic goal.

Everybody gets on these negative contrarian streaks from time to
time, where no matter what it is they’re supposed to be doing, that’s
the one thing they least want to do. Sometimes it’s a degenerative
negativism, where biological forces are driving it. Sometimes it’s an
€go pattern that says, “I’m too important to be doing all this dumb
Static stuff.”

Sometimes the contrary anti-static drive becomes a static pattern
of its own. This contrary stuff can become a tiger-ride where you
can’t get off and you have to keep riding and riding until the tiger
finally throws you and devours you. The degenerative contrarian stuff
usually goes that way. Drugs, illicit sex, alcohol and the like.

But sometimes it’s Dynamic, where your whole being senses that
the static situation is an enemy of life itself. That’s what drives the
really creative people—the artists, composers, revolutionaries and the
like—the feeling that if they don’t break out of this jailhouse somebody 
has built around them, they’re going to die.

But they’re not being contrary in a way that is just decadent.
They’re way too energetic and aggressive to be decadent. They’ re
fighting for some kind of Dynamic freedom from the Static patterns.
But the Dynamic freedom they’re fighting for is a kind of morality
too. And it’s a highly important part of the overall moral process. It’s
often confused with degeneracy but it’s actually a form of moral regeneration. 
Without its continual refreshment static patterns would
simply die of old age. I

When you see Lila that way it’s possible to interpret her current