
Static quality, the moral force of the priests, emerges in the wake
of Dynamic Quality. It is old and complex. It always contains a component of memory. 
Good is conformity to an established pattern of
fixed values and value objects. Justice and law are identical. Static
morality is full of heroes and villains, loves and hatreds, carrots and
sticks. Its values don’t change by themselves. Unless they are altered
by Dynamic Quality they say the same thing year after year. Sometimes they 
say it more loudly, sometimes more softly, but the message
is always the same.

During the next few months that Phedrus reflected he began to
transpose the static-Dynamic division out of the moral conflict of Zuii
into other seemingly unrelated areas. The negative esthetic quality
of the hot stove in the earlier example was now given some added
meaning by a static-Dynamic division of Quality. When the person
who sits on the stove first discovers his low-Quality situation, the front
edge of his experience is Dynamic. He does not think, “This stove
is hoe,’’ and then make a rational decision to get off. A “dim perception
of he Knows not what’ gets him off Dynamically. Later he generates
static patterns of thought to explain the situation.

A subject-object metaphysics presumes that this kind of Dynamic
aetion without thought is rare and ignores it when possible. But mystic
learning, goes in the opposite direction and tries to hold to the ongoing
Dynamic edge of all experience, both positive and negative, even
the Dynamic ongoing edge of thought itself. Phzedrus thought that
of the two kinds of students, those who study only subject-object
science and those who study only meditative mysticism, it would be
the mystic students who would get off the stove first. The purpose
of mystic meditation is not to remove oneself from experience but to
bring one's self closer to it by eliminating stale, confusing, static,
intellectual attachments of the past.

In a subject-object metaphysics morals and art are worlds apart,
morals being concerned with the subject quality and art with object
quality, But in the Metaphysics of Quality that division doesn’t exist.
‘They're the same. They both become much more intelligible when
references to what is subjective and what is objective are completely
thrown away and references to what is static and what is Dynamic
are taken up instead,


He found an example within the field of music. He said, imagine
that you walk down a street past, say, a car where someone has the
radio on and it plays a tune you’ve never heard before but which is
so fantastically good it just stops you in your tracks. You listen until
it’s done. Days later you remember exactly what that street looked
like when you heard that music. You remember what was in the store
window you stood in front of. You remember what the colors of the
cars in the street were, where the clouds were in the sky above the
buildings across the street, and it all comes back so vividly you wonder
what song they were playing, and so you wait until you hear it again.
If it’s that good you'll hear it again because other people will have
heard it too and have had the same feelings and that will make it
popular.

One day it comes on the radio again and you get the same feeling
again and you catch the name and you rush down the street to the
record store and buy it and can hardly wait until you can get it home
and play it.

You get home. You play it. It’s really good. It doesn’t quite transform 
the whole room into something different but it’s really good.
You play it again. Really good. You play it another time. Still good,
but you’re not so sure you want to play it again. But you play it again.
It’s okay but now you definitely don’t want to play it again. You put
it away.

The next day you play it again, and it’s okay, but something is
gone. You still like it and always will, you say. You play it again.
Yeah, that’s sure a good record. But you file it away and once in a
while play it again for a friend and maybe months or years later bring
it out as a memory of something you were once crazy about.

Now what has happened? You can say you’ve gotten tired of the
song but what does that mean? Has the song lost its quality? If it has,
why do you still say it’s a good record? Either it’s good or it’s not
good. If it’s good why don’t you play it? If it’s not good why do you
tell your friend it’s good?

If you think about this question long enough you will come to see
that the same kind of division between Dynamic Quality and static
quality that exists in the field of morals also exists in the field of art.
The first good, that made you want to buy the record, was Dynamic