
program and go about their ways leaving “We” mystified about how
all this could have happened. That’s what happened just now.

Mystified, and somewhat horrified too at the things bodies do
without its permission. All of this sexual morality of Rigel’s—it wasn’t
Just social codes. It was also Part of this sense of horror at these cells
“We” has invaded and the strange patterns of Quality that existed
before “We” arrived.

These cells make sweat and snot and phlegm. They belch and
bleed and fuck and fart and piss and shit and vomit and squeeze out
more bodies just like themselves all covered with blood and placental
slime that grow and squeeze out more bodies, on and on.

“We,”’ the software reality, find these hardware facts so distressing
that it covers them with euphemisms and clothes and toilets and
medical secrecy. But what “We” is covering up is pure quality for
the cells. The cells have gotten to their advanced state of evolution
through all this fucking and farting and pissing and shitting. That’s
quality! Particularly the sexual functions. From the cells’ point of
view sex is pure Dynamic Quality, the highest Good of all.

So when Phzedrus told Rigel that Lila had Quality he was telling
the truth. She does. This same attraction which is now so morally
condemned is what created the condemners.

Talk about ingratitude. These bodies would still be a bunch of
dumb bacteria if it hadn’t been for sexual quality. When mutation
was the only means of genetic change, life sat around for three billion
years, doing almost no changing at all. It was sexual selection that
shot it forward into the animals and plants we have today. A bacterium
gets no choice in what its Progeny are going to be, but a queen bee
gets to select from thousands of drones. That selection is Dynamic.
In all sexual selection, Lila chooses, Dynamically, the individual she
wants to project into the future. If he excites her sense of Quality
she joins him to perpetuate him into another generation, and he lives
on. But if he’s unable to convince her of his Quality—if he’s sick or
deformed or unable to satisfy her in some way—she refuses to join
him and his deformity is not carried on.

Now Phzedrus was really awake. Now he felt he was at some sort
of source. Was this thing that he had seen tonight the same thing
that he had glimpsed in the streetcar, the thing that had been bothering 
him all these years? He thought about it for a long time and
slowly decided that it probably was. . :

Lila is a judge. That’s who lay here beside him tonight: a judge
of hundreds of millions of years standing, and in the eyes of this judge
he was nobody very important. Almost anyone would do, and most
would do better than he. .

After a while he thought, maybe that’s why the famous ‘“‘Gioconda
Smile” in the Louvre, like Lila’s smile in the streetcar, has troubled
viewers for so many years. It’s the secret smile of a judge who has
been overthrown and suppressed for the good of social progress, but
who, silently and privately, still judges. .

“Sad Sack.” That was the term she used. It had no intellectual
meaning, but it had plenty of meaning nevertheless. It meant that
in the eyes of this biological judge all his intelligence was some kind
of deformity. She rejected it. It wasn’t what she wanted. Just as the
patterns of intelligence have a sense of disgust about the body functions, 
the patterns of biology, so do Lila’s patterns of biology have a
disgust about the patterns of intelligence. They don’t like it. It turns
them off. -

Phaedrus thought about William James Sidis, the prodigy who
could read five languages when he was five years old. After discovering
what Sidis had said about Indians, Phaedrus had read a full biography
of him and found that when Sidis was a teenager he announced he
would refuse to have anything to do with sex for the Test of his life.
It seemed as though in order to sustain a satisfactory intellectual life
he felt he had to cut himself off from social and biological domination
except where they were absolutely necessary. This vow of ancient
priests and ascetics was once considered a high form of morality, but
in the “Roaring Twenties” of the twentieth century a new standard
of morals had arrived, and when journalists found out about this vow
they ridiculed Sidis mercilessly. That coincided with the beginning
of a pattern of seclusion that lasted the rest of his life. .

“Is it better to have wisdom or is it better to be attractive to the
ladies?” That was a question debated by Provencal poets way back
in the thirteenth century. Sidis opted for wisdom, but it seemed to
Phaedrus there ought to be some way you could have both.
‘The question seemed to imply the stupidity of women but a