

There was a tacit but strong affection between Ed and Madam.
She did not have a license to sell liquor to be taken out. Quite often
Ed would run out of beer so late at night that everything except
Madam’s house was closed. There followed a ritual which was thoroughly
 enjoyed by both parties. Ed would cross the street and ask
Madam to sell him some beer. She invariably refused, explaining
every time that she did not have a license. Ed would shrug his
shoulders, apologize for asking, and go back to the lab. Ten minutes
later there would be soft footsteps on the stairs and a little thump
in front of the door and then running slippered steps down again.
Ed would wait a decent interval and then go to the door. And on
his doorstep, in a paper bag, would be six bottles of ice-cold beer.
He would never mention it to Madam. That would have been
breaking the rules of the game. But he repaid her with hours of his
time when she needed his help. And his help was not inconsiderable.

Sometimes, as happens even in the soundest whorehouse, there
would be a fight on a Saturday night—one of those things which
are likely to occur when love and wine come together. It was only
sensible that Madam would not want to bother the police or a
doctor with her little problem. Then her good friend Ed would
patch up cut faces and torn ears and split mouths. He was a good
operator and there were never any complaints. And naturally no
one ever mentioned the matter since he was not a doctor of medicine 
and had no license to practice anything except philanthropy.
Madam and Ed had the greatest respect for each other. “She’s one
hell of a woman,” he said. “I wish good people could be as good,”

Just as Madam was the target for every tired heist, so Ed was the
fall guy for any illicit scheme that could be concocted by the hustling
 instincts of some of the inhabitants of Cannery Row. The
people of the Row really loved Ed, but this affection did not forbid
them from subjecting him to any outrageous scheming that occurred to them. 
In nearly all cases he knew the game before the
play had even started and his hand would be in his pocket before
the intricate gambit had come to a request. But he would cautiously