

As one gets a little older and the energy of one’s youth declines,
the untreated altruist can start to refuse to “do windows.” He finds
himself no longer eager to celebrate extra Masses on a Sunday,
though he still believes he is saving the world. You won’t find him
sitting on the floor with the second graders or enduring the dull
meetings of the parish council or school board. He can’t be bothered
to train the lectors or prepare the penance service. He disdains the
efforts of “lesser” clergy, claiming to be “dedicating” himself to
“real” ministry, which means those one or two special ministries for
which he does manifest modest enthusiasm. Only these, says he, will
change the world. He doesn’t give the time of day to the people
he sees outside of Sunday Mass, but he pours his heart out to those
he meets giving a Marriage Encounter or through the Charismatic
Renewal. His priesthood grows into a specialty: he gives himself not
to others generally but to these others.

Thus does he convince himself that nothing is wrong. When
he gets upset or cranky, it is never because he has lost his love for
“the people.” He continues to imagine himself invulnerable and
grand even as the hole grows larger inside himself, He may even
have scenarios to explain the barrenness he experiences in prayer.

In any honest life of a saint, you will find another story, one of
lengthy struggle and much inner uncertainty. The two great
Theresas, Avila and the Little Flower, both seem to have suffered
from depression, for example. Teresa of Avila said she was burdened 
for years with barrenness in prayer, for which she made no
excuses; later she succumbed to violent seizures and bouts of hysteria 
that eventually left her paralyzed, seized by the darkest visions.
Unable to move, her pain was barely tolerable; at one point she was
so deeply in a coma that her community dug her a grave. Then in
1540, she awoke and the paralysis was gone; she stood up and
walked, a miracle.

The Little Flower’s autobiography was so honest about her
struggles that after her death her superiors covered over parts of it
with a more circumspect and traditional accounting of a holy life. It
was clear that at some point in her development she suffered something 
the equivalent of a nervous breakdown. This was not in spite
of her spiritual life; it was part of her spiritual life. 
Depression affects one’s functioning, not one’s character.

An altruist thinks the world can be changed by impersonating
Christ, meaning all his good qualities. This, he imagines, is what in
persona Christi means. But normal human beings, mere disciples,
come to recognize all good things as grace and even one’s own
virtues as gifts from God. In such circumstances, acedia is a gift, a
necessary cure for adolescent immaturity through the painful but
necessary unmasking of one’ amined hubris.

This is why I love the unambiguous honesty of those desert
rats at the end of antiquity. I never get tired of reading their stories,
whose protagonists are strong but not at all impervious; the sayings
detail the costs of discipleship clearly. They call a spade a spade,
including, to echo contemporary concerns, the earliest direct warnings 
I have ever found about the danger of attachments to boys and
the troubles of interacting with bishops.

The desert fathers say, “If you see a young man climbing
toward heaven by his own will, grab his foot and pull him down, for
it will be for his own good.” This is not because only the old men
have wisdom or because young men alone are afflicted with hubris.
It is neither an age issue nor a control thing. Although Jesus gives
his disciples lots to do, life is not what we do; it is what God gives us.