

But a jerk is no anti-hero. If you want to write about boors
and bigots, winos and whiners, you have to figure out a way
to make these characters interesting and not merely incompetent or 
repulsive. If you don’t, your readers won’t care
whether your character gets his art in the gallery or gets kicked
out on the street, won’t particularly want him to get the woman
he claims he longs for, and might even be disappointed that
she seems blind to his cretinism.

For an anti-hero to work as a protagonist, he needs saving
graces. He might be a boozer, a brawler, or an irresponsible
louse, but readers have to be convinced that he has some real
talents or virtues. You want the reader to have some emotional 
investment in him. That takes some strategy. Just because
the character tells us what a great and unjustly misunderstood 
person he is doesn’t mean we will believe it. The opposite might 
be true. Characters in love with themselves do not
come across as the most reliable of witnesses.

If you make your character witty, or perceptive, or peculiarly 
thoughtful, readers realize that he may behave erratically but 
something worthwhile is underneath. If you let readers
understand the circumstances that created his personality, so
that his vices or crimes are understood as reactions to things
that were done to him, sympathy results. That doesn’t mean
readers will approve of his acts, but it does mean that they
may care what happens to him, hope he mends his ways, are
saddened by his setbacks, and feel that the experience of
knowing him through fiction has been worthwhile. In Wright’s
tragic novel, Native Son, the main character keeps doing things
that make readers think, Oh no. Don’t do that. But Wright
provides an understanding that keeps readers emotionally
engaged even as they are shocked.

Anti-heroes can be unwilling victims, wise fools, and innocent 
misfits who have been ostracized by their cultures and
whose powerlessness gives them anti-hero status. They are
comic saints and baggy-pantsed martyrs witnessing the corruptness 
of the world. Kingsley Amis’s Lucky Jim flops through
the world of academia. In Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow, 
Tyrone Slothrop is whirled through post-World War II
chaos, losing his directions, his bearings, even his name. The
unlikely hero of John Kennedy Toole’s A Confederacy of
Dunces is a hopeless anachronism. Through them you can see
how vulnerability, sensitivity, or idealism can lurk inside
problematic protagonists.

Anti-heroes afflicted with passivity are a problem. Victims
can be main characters, but if they are passive, always acted 
upon rather than acting, they get tiresome. Readers tend to
be first irritated and then bored by someone who just lets
things happen to him time after time. The very narrative seems
to lose energy, and a sudden upturn at the end can’t save it.
The worm must be trying to turn, even if it can only writhe.
The person you love to hate is another category of antihero. 

This is not merely a cad or a clod, but a character who
is so energetically awful that you’re fascinated by his evil
schemes—villains like Satan in Paradise Lost who are heroic
in their villainy. Readers can become fascinated by malevolence,
 especially if they feel the character is his own worst
enemy and, though he brings pain to others, he somehow