MAN’S EMERGING MIND

we take care of a machine and drive carefully we may keep it
going beyond the usual run, but not for very long and not for
any very useful purpose. Living beyond our time will always
be tiresome and I think we waste our effort in looking for
ways to keep old worn-out bodies and minds together. The
fountain of youth flows from the beginning of life, not from
its end,
To be human means to be youthful and joyful in spirit,
which makes some people less human than others. And we are
youthful for a longer time than any other creature, far longer
even than those who live to a comparable age. Much of the
quality of life which we cherish most comes from this, the
freshness and eagerness of mind that stays with the lucky ones
most of their lives. To be more human demands a longer and
more thorough going youthfulness which I believe can come
only in the way it came before. We need to be stretched even
further between conception and death. If instead of trying to
add unwanted years to the aged person we manage to slow
the rate of growth and postpone puberty from fifteen years to
the age of twenty or even thirty, what would it mean to the
length and quality of life? It would be no greater a physiological 
step than the one we have already taken from the ape
and is no more fantastic a thought than what has so far happened. 

If the life span should be uniformly affected, puberty
at twenty would mean, for the female, menopause at sixty
and death at the century mark instead of seventy-five. Puberty
at thirty would mean menopause at ninety and death from
old age at one hundred and fifty—Methuselahs indeed. Yet I
suspect and hope it would work out a little differently, for it
is possible that doubling the age at which puberty is reached
would not necessarily double the life span as a whole, that it
might happen that the living elastic would stretch more at
the younger end than at the old and we could retain our youth
for a longer time than we would have to pay for in aged years.
I have chosen these figures for their simple arithmetic, not
for any other reason. I may be overestimating or underestimating what 
is possible, for there is no way to tell. But I am
certain of this: that a mechanism exists whereby life can be
extended in the sense I have indicated, or else we would not
be what we already are. And if it has worked so far, it conceivably 
can be made to go on working if it is not doing so even
now—the wheel turns so slowly that in any case we cannot
sense its motion. Yet feasibility is something distinct from
desirability and it is the last that concerns me at the moment.
What the overall effects of such a change would be are difficult
to estimate. They would be vast, to say the least, but they cannot 
be discussed as though no other changes had taken place,
no matter how enticing the vistas may appear to be for mental
exercising or even dreams. Clearly the whole of life would be
altered in a deeply intensifying manner. :

Our brains have grown as much as have the youthful quality
and time of our individual lives, and they have grown to a larger
extent than is shown by the dimensions of a head. Brains have
expanded greatly in area but have puckered and folded to keep
within bounds, and the cortex may now be twice as large as
it was in mid-Ice-age men, and larger than it was in a Neanderthal. 
We cannot tell what change, if any, there has been since
the ice melted away ten thousand years ago. Yet whether we
have lost motion or not, the possibility remains that in the
course of evolutionary time an expanding brain can still go
on expanding. It is possible that our brains can continue to
improve without further expansion, by a process of refinement
of the already exquisite architectural detail they now possess,
or we may have reached the limit in this respect and the next
step, if there is to be one, is necessarily to expand once more.

Supposing it does, what then? It depends on how much and
in what way. You can see the tange already in the present
scale, for we have musicians’ brains, painters’ brains, mathe-