
gressively impossible as we approach the saturation point, and
yet climatic change continues to bother us. We left the last
major phase of the ice age behind when the ice sheets melted
about ten thousand years ago. That should have been the end
and we might reasonably have expected the warming up
process to have continued steadily on. It didn’t. Somewhere
about 500 B.c. when the process of climatic cooling and
drying had gone on for about two thousand years, the ice
sheet covering the Arctic Ocean suddenly reappeared, possibly
covering the surface in one season once it had started to form.
With its reappearance the climate of the northern continents
changed sharply from cool and dry to cool and wet, and it
has been more or less rainy ever since. So began the SubAtlantic 
period in which we still exist. Yet its beginning coincided with 
the full development of the Greek City States and
the dozen or so generations that gave the western world the
mainspring of its civilization and climate may have been a
factor directly or indirectly.
Since then it would be hard to say whether the ice is
coming or going. It was relatively dry and warm in Europe
iW during the first century a.p., and again from the fifth to the
a eighth when Alpine traffic became freely possible, and during
\ this rather milder period the Irish managed to sail to Iceland,
which they settled, and to the Azores, and possibly America.
A little later, while conditions were almost as good, the Vikings
i also reached Iceland and established their Greenland colonies.
Me ‘Then came what has now affectionately been called the Little
Ice Age. It starts with a great increase in rainfall and much
storminess throughout the 13th century, the climate suddenly
worsening about 1300 A.p. to such an extent that during the
next three generations farming became virtually impossible
in northern Europe and thousands of villages were abandoned.
So was the Norse settlement in Greenland, forevermore the
lost colony. But the study of pollen grains show the dismal
course of climatic events during the late middle ages. That
the Renaissance took place when it did is due mote to the
use of coal than to any climatic benediction, though the
combination of a warm home in a cool climate seems to be
more mentally invigorating than most. Then at the beginning
of the seventeenth century there was a general advance of the
glaciers, and it is only since about 1850 that they have begun
to recede.

Where does it leave us? At present we are still in a phase of
warming-up that may already be near its end. Great sheets of
ice are beginning to break loose from the edges of Arctic islands
and the ice sheet as a whole is getting thinner. It could disappear 
as suddenly as it came. Or we may swing back into a
colder and wetter period such as the one we have just left and
continue these fluctuations more or less indefinitely. All we
really know is that a full scale ice age lies not very far in the
past, that the ice age as a whole had three periods within it
at least as free of ice as at present, that these interglacial
periods lasted at least forty thousand years and one of them
very much longer, and that the last cold phase is only ten
thousand years past. We may be out of it for good, in which
case what is left of the ice caps will eventually melt, and so
raise the sea level just high enough to flood London and
New York and a few other choice spots. ‘Temperate climate
will extend to the poles, which would not be particularly
helpful, and the present temperate continents will become
warmer and drier—to the disadvantage of water-consuming
humanity. If the ice should come back in force however,
which is equally possible, the tropics and the temperate zones
will contract toward the equator.

The signs are ominous when we look at the most recently
discovered natural recording thermometer. Cores of mud taken
from the bottom of the mid-Atlantic Ocean contain the
shells of minute animals that used to be alive at the surface.