

MASTERY

For Leonardo da Vinci, as he progressed in his studio work
for Verrocchio, he began to experiment and to assert his own style. He
found to his surprise that the Master was impressed with his inventiveness.

For Leonardo, this indicated that he was near the end of his apprenticeship. 
Most people wait too long to take this step, generally out of fear. It is 
always easier to learn the rules and stay within your comfort zone. Often you 
must force yourself to initiate such actions or experiments before you think you
are ready. You are testing your character, moving past your fears, and developing
a sense of detachment to your work—looking at it through the eyes of others. 

You are getting a taste for the next phase in which what you produce
will be under constant scrutiny. You will know when your apprenticeship 
is over by the feeling that you have nothing left to learn in this environment. 
It is time to declare your independence or move to another place to continue 
your apprenticeship and expand your skill base. Later in life, when you are 
confronted with a career change or the need to learn new skills, having gone 
through this process before, it will become second nature. 
You have learned how tolearn.

Many people might find the notion-of an apprenticeship and skill acquisition 
as quaint relics of bygone eras when work meant making things. After
all, we have entered the information and computer age, in which technology 
makes it so we can do without the kinds of menial tasks that require
practice and repetition; so many things have become virtual in our lives,
making the craftsman model obsolete. Or so the argument goes.

In truth, however, this idea of the nature of the times we are living in
is completely incorrect, even dangerous. The era we have entered is not one
in which technology will make everything easier, but rather a time of increased 
complexity that affects every field. In business, competition has become globalized 
and more intense. A businessperson must have a command of a much larger picture 
than in the past, which means more knowledge and skills. The future in science does 
not lie in increased specialization, but rather in the combining and cross-fertilization 
of knowledge in various fields. In the arts, tastes and styles are changing at an 
accelerated rate. An artist must be on top of this and be capable of creating new forms, 
always remaining ahead of the curve. This often requires having more than just a 
specialized knowledge of that particular art form—it requires knowing ether sects, 
as thesciences, and what is happening in the world.

In all of these areas, the human brain is asked to do and handle more
than ever before. We are dealing with several fields of knowledge constantly
intersecting with our own, and all of this chaos is exponentially increased

