

Initial dreams are often amazingly transparent and
clear-cut. But as the work of analysis progresses, the
dreams in a little while cease to be clear. If they should I
prove exceptional, and keep their clarity, we can be
sure that the analysis has as yet not touched some 
important part of the personality. As a rule, the dreams I
become less transparent, and more blurred, shortly I
after the beginning of the treatment. It becomes 
increasingly difficult to interpret them, a further reason 
for this being that a point may soon be reached where
the doctor is unable, if the truth be told, to understand
the situation as a whole. This is how the matter really
stands, for to say that the dreams are unintelligible is
a mere reflection of the doctor’s subjective opinion.

Nothing is unclear to the understanding; it is only I
when we fail to understand that things appear unintelligible 
and confused. In themselves, dreams are clear—
that is, they are just as they must be under the given
conditions. If we look back at these “ unintelligible ”
dreams from a later stage of the treatment or from a
distance of some years, we are often astounded at our
own blindness. It is a fact that, as an analysis progresses,
we come upon dreams that are strikingly obscure in comparison 
with the initial dreams. But the doctor should not be too sure 
that these later dreams are really confused, or be too hasty 
in accusing the patient of deliberate resistance. He would do better to
take the fact as an indication of his own growing inability to 
understand the situation. The psychiatrist likewise is prone 
to call a patient “confused” when he would do well to recognize
 the projection and admit his own confusion, for it is really 
his understanding it grows confused in face of the patient’s strange
behavior. For the purposes of therapy, moreover, it is
highly important for the analyst to admit his lack of
understanding from time to time, for nothing is morc
inbearable for the patient than to be always underwood. 

The latter in any case relies too much upon the
mysterious insight of the doctor, and, by appealing tc
his professional vanity, lays a dangerous trap for him
lly taking refuge in the doctor’s self-confidence and
“profound” understanding, the patient loses all sense
of reality, falls into a stubborn transference, and retards
the cure.

Understanding is clearly a subjective process. It may
be very one-sided, in that the physician understands
while the patient does not. In such a case the doctor
sometimes feels it his duty to convince the patient, and
if the latter will not allow himself to be convinced, the
doctor accuses him of resistance. When the understanding 
is all on miy side, I find it advisable to stress my
lack of understanding. It is relatively unimportant
whether the doctor understands or not, but everything
hangs on the patient’s doing so. What is really needed
is a mutual agreement which is the fruit of joint reflection. 


It is one-sided, and therefore dangerous, understanding for 
the doctor to prejudge the dream from the standpoint of a certain 
doctrine and to make a pronouncement which may be theoretically sound, 
but does not win the patient’s assent. In so far as the pronouncement 
fails in this respect, it is incorrect in the
practical sense; and it may also be incorrect in the
sense that it angcipates and thereby cripples the actual
development of the patient. We appeal only to the pa
tient’s brain if we try to inculcate a truth; but if w
help him to grow up to this truth in the course of hi
own development, we have reached his heart, and this
appeal goes deeper and acts with greater force.

When the doctor’s interpretation is based merely
upon a one-sided theory or a preconceived opinion, his
chances of convincing the patient or of achieving any