
Forms of solution correspond exactly, of course, to the forms
of tasks. Certain tasks are completed before they are set, or be- _
fore the time required by the person assigning the task. Thus
the hero finds out the princess’ distinctive marks before he is
requested to do so. Preliminary solutions of this type shall be 
designated by the sign *N.

XXVIII. THE HERO IS RECOGNIZED. (Definition: recognition. Designation: Q.) “

He is recognized by a mark, a brand (a wound, a star marking), 
or by a thing given to him (a ring, towel). In this case,
recognition serves as a function corresponding to branding
and marking. The hero is also recognized by his accomplishment
of a difficult task (this is almost always preceded by an unrecognized 
arrival). Finally, the hero may be recognized immediately
after a long period of separation. In the latter case, parents and
children, brothers and sisters, etc., may recognize one another.

XXVIII. THE FALSE HERO OR VILLAIN IS EXPOSED.

(Definition: exposure. Designation: Ex.)

This function is, in most cases, connected with the one preceding. 
Sometimes it is the result of an uncompleted task (the
false hero cannot lift the dragon’s heads). Most often it is 
presented in the form of a story (‘Here the princess told everything
as it was”). Sometimes all the events are recounted from the very
beginning in the form of a tale['The villain is among the listeners, 
and he gives himself away by expressions of disapproval
(197){ Sometimes a song is sung telling of what has occurred and
exposing the villain (244). Other unique forms of exposure also
occur (258).

XXIX. THE HERO IS GIVEN A NEW APPEARANCE.
(Definition: transfiguration. Designation: T.)

1. A new appearance is directly effected by means of the
magical action of a helper (T*). The hero passes through
the ears of a horse (or cow) and receives a new, handsome appearance.

'ME FUNCTIONS OF DRAMATIS PERSONAE 63

2. The hero builds a marvelous palace (T?). He resides
in the palace himself as the prince. A maiden suddenly
awakens during the night in a marvelous palace (127).
Although the hero is not always transformed in these
instances, he nevertheless does undergo a change in personal appearance.

~3. The hero puts on new garments (T*). A girl puts on a
(magical?) dress and ornaments and suddenly is endowed 
with a radiant beauty at which everyone marvels

rattonatieed and humorous forms (T*). ‘These forms
are partly explained by those preceding (as their transformations), 
and, in part, must be studied and explained
in connection with the study of tale-anecdotes, whence
they originate. Actual changes of appearance do not take
place in these cases, but a new appearance is achieved
by deception. For example, a fox leads Kuzin’ka to a
king saying that Kuzin’ka fell into a ditch and requests
clothes. ‘The fox is given royal garments. Kuzin’ka appears 
in the royal attire and is taken for a tsar’s son. All
similar instances may be formulated in the following
manner: false evidence of wealth and beauty is accepted
as true evidence.

XXX. THE VILLAIN IS PUNISHED. (Definition: punishment. Designation. U.)

The villain is shot, banished, tied to the tail of a horse, 
commits suicide, and so forth. In parallel with this we sometimes
have a magnani don (U neg.). Usually only the villain
of the second move and the false hero are punished, while the
first villain is punished only in those cases in which a battle and
pursuit areabsent from the story. Otherwise, he is killed in
battle or perishes during the pursuit (a witch bursts in an 
attempt to drink up the sea, etc.).

XXXI. THE HERO IS MARRIED AND ASCENDS THE
THRONE. (Definition: wedding. Designation: W.)
I 1. A bride and a kingdom are awarded at once, or the
hero receives half the kingdom at first, and the whole
kingdom upon the death of the parents (W%).