 such as cudgels, swords, guslas, balls, and many others; (4)
qualities or capacities which are directly given, such as the power
of transformation into animals, etc. All of these objects of 
transmission we shall conditionally term “magical agents.”4 The
forms by which they are transmitted are the following:

 The agent is directly transferred (F*). Such acts of
transference very often have the character of a reward:
an old man presents a horse as a gift; forest animals
offer their offspring, etc. Sometimes the hero, instead
of receiving a certain animal directly for his own use,
obtains the power of turning himself into it (for details
see Chapter VI). Some tales end with the moment of
reward. In these instances the gift amounts to something
of a certain material value and is not a magical agent
(f). If a hero’s reaction is negative, then the transference
may not occur (F neg.), or is replaced by cruel retribution. 

The hero is devoured, frozen, has strips cut out
of his back, is thrown under a stone, etc. (F contr.).
2. The agent is pointed out (F*). An old woman indicates 
an oak tree under which lies a flying ship (144).
An old man points out a peasant from whom a magic
steed may be obtained ( 138).
3. The agent is prepared (F*). “The magician went out

_ on the shore, drew a boat in the sand and said: “Well,
-_ do you see this boat?” ‘We see it.’ ‘Get into it.’”’
4. The agent is sold and purchased (F*). The hero buys
a magic hen (197); +7 he buys a magic dog and cat (190),
etc. The intermediate form between purchase and preparation 
is “preparation on order”; the hero places an
order for a chain to be made by a blacksmith (105). (The
designation for this instance: F,*),

5. The agent falls into the hands of the hero by chance
(7s found by him) (F*). Ivan sees a horse in the field and
mounts him (132); he comes upon a tree bearing magic
apples (192).

6. The agent suddenly appears of its own accord (F*).
~ A staircase suddenly appears, leading up a mountainside (156). 
Agents sprouting out of the ground constitute a special form of 
independent appearance (F“), and
they may be magical bushes (100, 101), twigs, a dog and
a horse (201), or a dwarf.

7. The agent is eaten or drunk (F*). This is not, strictly
speaking, a form of transference, although it may be
coordinated, conditionally, with the cases cited. Three
beverages provide the drinker with unusual strength
(125); the eating of a bird’s giblets endows heroes with
various magical qualities (195).

8. The agent is seized (F*). The hero steals a horse from
“a witch (159); he seizes the disputed objects (197). The
application of magical agents against the person who
exchanged them and the taking back of objects which
had been given may also be considered a special form
of seizure. 

9. Vartous characters place themselves at the disposal of
the hero (F*). An animal, for example, may either present 
its offspring or offer its services to the hero, making,
as it were,‘a present of itself. Let us compare the following 
instances: A steed is not always presented directly,
or in a flintstone, Sometimes the donor simply informs
the hero of an incantation formula with which the hero
may invoke the steed to appear. In the latter instance,
Ivan is not actually given anything: he only receives the
right to a helper. We have the same situation when the
suppliant offers Ivan the right to make use of him: the
pike informs Iv4n of a formula by which he may call it
forth (“Say only: ‘by the pike’s command .. .’ ”). If,
finally, the formula also is omitted, and the animal simply
 promises, “‘Sometime I'll be of use to you,” then we
still have before us a moment in which the hero receives
the aid of a magical agent in the form of an animal.
Later on it will become Ivan’s helper (f°), It often happens
 that various magical creatures, without any warning, 
suddenly appear or are met on the way and offer

bec,