
The remaining step is derived from Evans-Pritchard and
Radeliffe-Brown (1951) where the question is, for instance, not
Why all these birds?’ but ‘Why particularly Eaglehawk and
Crow amongst other pairs?’ Selection by natives implies that 
they are thought of as being in a relation of opposition along
a common dimension: thus both are meat-eaters, but the Eagle
is hunter, the Crow scavenger. This difference serves to
distinguish human groups so that E : C:: moiety A : moiety B —
or one human group is to another human group as one species
is to another, i.e. discrete. We arrive ata very common structural
principle: the complementariness of opposite pairs, another
example of a binary-type discrimination.

“The alleged Totemism is no more than a particular expression, 
by means of a special nomenclature formed of animal
and plant names (in a certain code, as we should say today)
which is its sole distinctive characteristic, of correlations and
oppositions which may be formalized in other ways, e.g.
among certain tribes of North and South America, by
oppositions of the type sky/earth, war/peace, upstream/downstream, 
red/white, etc. The most general model of this, and
the most systematic application, is to be found perhaps in
China, in the opposition of the two principles of Yang and
Yin, as male and female, day and night, summer and winter
the union of which results in an organized totality (tao) such
as the conjugal pair, the day, or the year. Totemism is thus
reduced to a particular fashion of formulating a general
problem, viz. how_to make it an obstacle to integration,
 serve rather to produce it. _Radcliffe-Brown’s demonstration 
ends decisively the dilemma in which the adversaries as well as the proponents
of Totemism have been trapped because they could assign
only two roles to living species, viz., that of natural stimulus
or that of an arbitrary pretext. The animals in Totemism
cease to be solely or principally creatures which are feared,
admired or envied: their perceptible reality permits the
thought on the basis of empirical observation. We can
understand, too, that natural species are chosen not because
they are “good to eat’’ but because they are “good to think” ’ )) \
(Lévi-Strauss, 1962a, p. 127; 1964a, p. 89).

In the final chapter, Lévi-Strauss shows the unexpected and
surprising congruence of Bergson, Jean Jacques Rousseau, and
Radcliffe-Brown. Bergson, he argues, understood primitive
thought so well because his own doctrine of creative evolution
was so close to certain modes of primitive thought (Sioux
examples). The kinship is described by Lévi-Strauss as resulting

‘from one and the same desire to apprehend in a total
fashion the two aspects of reality which the philosopher terms
continuous and discontinuous; from the same refusal to
choose between the two; and from the same effort to see
them as complementary perspectives giving on to the same
truth. Radcliffe-Brown, though abstaining from metaphysical
considerations which were foreign to his temperament,
followed the same route, when he reduced Totemism to a
particular form of a universal tendency, in order to reconcile
opposition and integration’ . (Lévi-Strauss, 1962a, p. 141;
1964a, pp. 98-99).

Durkheim, on the other hand, while fully aware, in the
classification theory which was to be so fertile in Mauss’s hands,
of the intellect’s role in social life, paralysed himself by his
affirmation that the social primes over the intellectual. While
Bergson can make of intellectual categories immediate data of
the mind utilized by the social order to define and constitute
itself, Durkheim, tying intellect to social forms, is left with a
highly impoverished field of explanatory elements with which
to account for the social order. He must thus fall back on
sentiments, affective values, and vague ideas of contamination
and contagion.

Yet more of a master of the passage from Nature to Culture
was Rousseau, writing in complete ignorance of totemism, that
is before Long’s contribution. Rousseau is hailed by LéviStrauss 
as having grasped the triple passage from animality to
humanity, Nature to Culture, and affectivity to intellectuality
through the medium of the only psychic human state whose
content is indissociably both affective and intellectual — the