
Is there a collection of dreams from the same tribes which 
would at wedding ceremonies in the Near East and Ceylon immedia: he
show the same patterns? Can these myths be seriously treated
as an accurate reflection of the reasoning of these tribesmen?

The other problem that shows itself behind this one, and
that exercises Lévi-Strauss, is whether it is possible to isolate
some universal principles of thought from the staggering
confrontation between their thought and his own? This is why
he is so deeply interested in the difficulties encountered in this
act of comprehension and translation of native categories into
the terms of another culture. The problem is one of immense
complexity. It is clear that certain areas of human experience
are paralleled from culture to culture. From the theoretically
unlimited impressions of earthly existence, some are selected for
attention over and over again. Some of these, food, cooking,
fire, water, the sun and the moon, light and darkness, high and
low, male and female, generation and death, may be used as
tools with which to build coherent systems of symbols. LéviStrauss 
moves into some of these controversial regions towards
. the last pages of the book. No naive simplicity is to be expected
here, but there certainly are audacious suggestions. For
instance, the treatment of the eclipse in primitive societies and
the custom of charivari are juxtaposed.

In the European tradition the charivari was undertaken
upon the remarriage of widows, or when girls deserted a good
suitor for one who was merely rich, aged, or a stranger, or
when pregnant women married in white, or for young men who
sold themselves to a woman for her money, and so on. In other
words, the charivari was occasioned when there was an interruption 
in or reversal of the proper and expected order of events.
The couple were met with a lot of noise. The eclipse, too,
occasioned a great deal of noisy demonstration. Lévi-Strauss
notes that with all the noise they are trying to chase away, in
one case, an astronomical monster which is deyouring the sun
and, in the other, a ‘sociological’ monster who is altering the
proper order of things.

From these beginnings, the author moves on to an investigation 
of the role of noise/silence in the myths and customs of
many cultures. He shows how noise is often associated with
reprehensible unions (though many negative examples of noise
come-to-attain), whereas [proper unions demand silence. [Thus
the domestic fire (a symbol of great importance), which unites
the earth and the sun, demands silence, in contradistinction to
eclipses, which are met with noise.

It cannot be said that these ideas on universal thought
categories are taken very far. But in these days when most
anthropologists tend to take total relativity of cultures and
complete permutability of human experience for granted, it is
worthwhile to observe some efforts to synthesize the position
and to attempt at least to detect basic experiences which may
be repeated even in very exotic cultures (Leach, 1958).

Lévi-Strauss makes humble claims. He says that he hopes
to have left the field in a less bad state than it was before.
Those who disagree with him should, indeed, take a look at
some myths from South America which have not been analysed.
One can see them in their raw state, for instance, in Fock (1963).
The motifs of climbing trees and jaguars all reappear again but
remain as obscure as the myths collected from other parts of
the world.

The immediate effect of this work will be to place serious
burdens on the fieldworker. The kind of detailed micro-analysis
which Lévi-Strauss has undertaken demands a fairly large set
of myths from the societies concerned. Few anthropologists,
one suspects, who have concentrated their work on social
structure or even on religion would also be able to produce
voluminous evidence on mythology in the native language. The
question is of considerable importance for it bears both upon
new directions in fieldwork and on the method of analysis of
religious material. For the lesson of myths is equally applicable
to ritual. The analysis must proceed not on general impressions
and the opinions of the informants on various subjects
haphazardly collected but on a systematic analysis of a body
of very detailed material, such as a collection of myths or an
entire series of rituals.

One of the most important criticisms to be levelled against this
work is formalism. Lévi-Strauss applies his own method
vigorously: he is single minded in attempting to trace connec-