

is the technique of “going back” in order to learn one’s previous lives. 
It is a pan-Indian technique. It is documented in the Yoga-siitras (III, 18), 
it is known to all sages and contemplatives of the Buddha’s period, 
and it is practiced andrecommended by the Buddha himself.

“The method is to cast off from a precise instant of Time,
the nearest to the present moment, and to retrace the Time
backward (pratiloman or ‘against the stream’) in order to
arrive ad originem, the point where existence first ‘burst’ into
the world and unleashed Time. Then one rejoins that paradoxical 
instant before which Time was not, because nothing
had been manifested. We can grasp the meaning and the aim
of this technique: to re-ascend the stream of Time would
necessarily bring one back ultimately to the point of departure, 
which coincides with that of the cosmogony. 

To re-live one’s past lives would also be to understand them and, 
to a certain degree, ‘burn up’ one’s ‘sins’; that is, the sum of 
the deeds done in the state of ignorance and capitalized from one life
to the next by the law of karma. But there is something of
even greater importance: one attains to the beginning of Time
and enters the Timeless—the eternal present which preceded
the temporal experience inaugurated by the ‘fall’ into human
existence. In other words, it is possible, starting from any
moment of temporal duration, to exhaust that duration by
retracing its course to the source and so come out into the
Timeless, into eternity. But that is to transcend the human
condition and regain the non-conditioned state, which preceded the 
fall into Time and the wheel of existences.”

Hatha-yoga and certain Tantric schools employ the method
called “going against the current” (ujana sadhana) or the
“regressive” (ulta) technique, in order to obtain the “inversion” 
of all the psycho-physiological processes. In the man who
accomplishes it this “return” or “regression” finds expression
in the annihilation of the Cosmos and hence brings about
“emergence from Time,” entrance into “immortality.” Now,
in the Tantric view immortality can be obtained only by
halting manifestation and hence the process of disintegration;
ne must proceed “against the current” I(ujdna sadhana) and
recover the primordial Unity that existed in illo tempore,
before the Creation.1® What is necessary, then, is to enact in
one’s own being the process of cosmic resorption, and so return 
to the “origin.” The Shivasamhita (I, 69 f.) sets forth
a significant spiritual exercise. After describing the creation
of the Universe by Shiva, the text describes the inverse process
of cosmic resorption, as it is to be lived, experienced by the
yogi. The latter sees the element Earth become “subtle” and
dissolve in the element Water, Water dissolve in Fire, Fire
in Air, Air in Ether, and so on, until all is reabsorbed into
the Great Brahman.’ The yogi witnesses the inverse of the
process of Creation, he “goes back” until he reaches the
“origin.” This yogic exercise may be compared with the Taoist
technique for “returning to the egg” and the primordial
Great-One.

To repeat: we have no intention of putting Indo-Chinese
mystical techniques and primitive therapies on the same plane.
They are different cultural phenomena. But it is interesting
to observe a certain continuity of human behavior in respect
to Time, both down the ages and in various cultures. This

