
last the tale is a trite lesson about Hebrew sexual morality. I
will say more below of how these ‘versions’ would look coming
out of the mythologic computer. At this stage of the discussion
we should treat the computer as a red herring and forget for
the moment the quest for the real meaning. We can then begin
seriously to evaluate Lévi-Strauss’s approach to mythology.

First, we should recognize his debt to the dialectical method
of Hegelian-Marxist philosophy. The dialectic was Hegel’s
speculation about the nature of reality and about the logical
technique by which it could be grasped. When Lévi-Strauss
says that mythic thought follows a strict logic of its own, he
means a Hegelian logic of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis,
moving in ever more complex cycles to comprehend all the
oppositions and limitations inherent in thought. According to
Lévi-Strauss, the structure of myth is a dialectic structure in
which opposed logical positions are stated, the oppositions
mediated by a restatement, which again, when its internal
structure becomes clear, gives rise to another kind of opposition,
which in its turn is mediated or resolved, and so on.

On the assumption that it is the nature of myth to mediate
contradictions, the method of analysis must proceed by
distinguishing the oppositions and the mediating elements. And
it follows, too, that the function of myth is to portray the
contradictions in the basic premises of the culture. The same
goes for the relation of myth to social reality. The myth is a
contemplation of the unsatisfactory compromises which, after
all, compose social life. In the devious statements of the myth,
people can recognize. indirectly what it would be difficult to
admit openly and yet. what is patently clear to all and sundry,
that the ideal is not attainable.

Lévi-Strauss does not stick his neck out so far as to say that
people are reconciled better or worse to their makeshift 
arrangements and contradictory formulae — but merely that myth makes
explicit their experience of the contradictoriness of reality.

A summary of ‘La Geste d’Asdiwal’! best denionstrates how
this is to be understood. It is a cycle of myths told by the
Tsimshian tribes. These are a sparse population of migratory
hunters and fishers who live on the Pacific coast, south of
Alaska. They are culturally in the same group with Haida and

The Meaning of Myth

Tlingit, northernmost representatives of Northwest Coast
culture. Topographically their territory is dominated by the
two parallel rivers, Nass and Skeena, which flow southwest to
the sea. In the summer they live on vegetable products collected
by women, and in winter on marine and land animals and fish
killed by the men. The movements of fish and game dictate
their seasonal movements between sea and mountains, and the
northern and southern rivers. The Tsimshian were organized in
dispersed matrilineal clans and lived in typical Northwest Coast
composite dwellings which housed several families. They tended
to live with their close maternal kin, generally practicing
avunculocal residence at marriage and the ideal was to marry
a mother’s brother’s daughter.

The myth begins during the winter famine in the Skeena
valley. A mother and daughter, separated hitherto by their
marriages but now both widowed by the famine, set out from
East and West, one from upstream and one from downstream
of the frozen Skeena, to meet each other half-way. The
daughter becomes the wife of a mysterious bird who feeds
them both and when she gives birth to a miraculous child,
Asdiwal, its bird father gives him a magic bow and arrow,
lance, snow-shoes, cloak, and hat which make him invisible
at will, invincible, and able to produce an inexhaustible
supply of food. The old mother dies and the bird father
disappears. Asdiwal and his mother walk West to her natal
village. From there he follows a white bear into the sky
where it is revealed as Evening-Star, the daughter of the Sun.
When Asdiwal has succeeded, thanks to his magic equipment,
in a series of impossible tasks, the Sun allows him to marry
Evening-Star, and, because he is homesick, to take his wife
back to the earth generously supplied with magic food. Or
earth, because Asdiwal is unfaithful to her, his sky wife
leaves him. He follows her half-way to the sky, where she
kills him with a thunderbolt. His father-in-law, the Sun,
brings him to life and they live together in the sky until
Asdiwal feels homesick again. Once home, Asdiwal finds his
mother is dead and, since nothing keeps him in her village,
he continues walking to the West. This time he makes a