

curtain, which excludes all perceptible contiguity between the
initial and final stages. The analysis of totemism can thus well
be said to belong to an ‘ethnologic’. It follows that in my
Figure 1 the broken lines relating Category to Group on the
right imply no time passage between the Nature and Culture
levels, whereas the continuous lines on the left do imply such a
passage in the relation of Category to Person.

NOTES

1. Jakobson and Halle (1956, pp. 29-31). We can define phonemes as ‘a
minimal list of phonetic elements with which it is possible to represent and to
distinguish one word from another in a language’.

2. Feedback: the setting-up of self-stabilizing control action by an effect
retroacting upon one of its factors.

3. An excellent short account of the cross-fertilization of disciplines — in this
ease Communication Engineering and Neurology — occurs in John von
Neumann’s The Computer and the Brain (1958). Lévi-Strauss’s interest in
von Neumann’s work is well known.

4. The praise of Buddhism which occurs in the last chapters of T'ristes Tropiques
may also be elucidated by the curious equation here between an ‘essence’
which has been there from the beginning ‘in toto’ and an ‘existence’ which
merely reveals its plan in history. One is also reminded of the ‘self’s’ painful
discovery of its original condition through the mind’s more and more exasperated 
efforts to break down all possible contradictions.

5. Sacrifice also blurred this distinction but could not be dismissed as entirely
primitive since it was obviously a part of the Western higher religions. By
linking natur totemism to natur sacrifice, however, primitive sacrifice could be
to some extent kept in its place.

6. ‘Inefficient selection of elements’: ‘un mauvais découpage de la realité’
(Lévi-Strauss, 1962a, p. 25) [Needham translates this as ‘a mistaken division
of reality’ (1964a, p. 18) E.R.L.].

7. Yam: body of Kafika; taro: body of Taumako; breadfruit: head of
Fangarere; coconut: head of Tafua.

8. Further contrasts between totems and gods are revealed by the fact that
the god is believed to enter the fish but does not change into it; it is never the
totality of the species that is in question but only a single animal; the occurrence 
is exceptional whereas the relations between clans and plants are
permanent. A number of religious, non-totemic prohibitions are associated
with the fact that the god can incarnate a number of different animals.

9. An example is provided by the long quotation from Lévi-Strauss (1950)
cited above. In view of most of what has been said in this paper, it is a little
hard to see ‘knowledge’ as ‘continuous’.


