

Simple empiricism, indeed, invites the kind of criticism that
Lévi-Strauss develops in discussing Elkin’s fragmentation of
‘totemism’ into various ‘totemisms’: sex totemism, moiety
totemism, clan totemism, dream totemism, local totemisms,
section totemism, sub-section totemism, etc. (Elkin, 1933). The
problem is merely rephrased, not eliminated: now it becomes
‘What is the sociological significance of totemisms’, instead of
‘What is the sociological significance of totemism?’

Or, as Lévi-Strauss wittily puts it, Elkin, ‘instead of helping
to slay the hydra [of totemism] . . . has dismembered it and
made peace with the bits’ (Lévi-Strauss, 1962a, p. 66).

For Lévi-Strauss, indeed, the problem is not to understand
totemism, but to abolish it. Totemism is not a separable
‘ethnographic’ specimen peculiar to the Australians and some
other peoples, but a particular instance of a much more general
phenomenon, one indeed that all societies have to face in one
way or another: the problem of how men perceive, select,
intellectually order, and socially structure the similarities and
differences in both the natural and cultural realms respectively,
and how connections are established between these two orders.
It is not that there is a ‘natural’ order in Nature, which, as in
seventeenth-century theories of consciousness, somehow ‘orders’
or registers itself automatically within brains which passively
‘receive’ these already-processed sense impressions. Nature
itself is ordered by the active organizing intervention of the
brain, as the eighteenth-century idealists, nota y Kant,
correctly told us. The order of Nature is not mechanically
registered, but is created by human agency. It is an ordering
achieved_via human consciousness, not an order “in itselt’!

The ordering of Nature is thus as much a human product, the
outcome of human activity within Nature, as is (more obviously)
the ordering of society. The gulf between verbal and non-verbal
aspects of culture, between the ordering of cultural experience
through the medium of written documents and ordering via the
classification of other objects in the environment is thus
bridged in Lévi-Strauss’s analysis. The totemic ‘objects are not
just objects; they are messages” (Lévi-Strauss, 1962b, p. 355).

Groote Kylandt Totemism

In_classifying, man organizes his experience, and locates the
classified raw materials of his experience within a framework 
of meaning; the imputation of meaning rests upon an underlying
set of values. Thus the worlds of natural objects and cultural
objects are brought into relationship with each other. In
Lévi-Strauss’s paradoxical formulation, the problem then
consists in analyzing how these differences between the two
areas, Nature and Culture, ‘resemble’ each other (or perhaps,
more accurately, ‘are brought into relationship’), since there
may not if = as we shall see — that closeness of fit between
different \classificatory schemes within the same culture which
alone would permit us, legitimately, to speak of ‘resemblance’,
‘congruence’, etc.?

One possible type of explanation of totemism rejected by
Lévi-Strauss (1962a, Ch. 5) is the naturalistic or utilitarian
type, which asserts that the objects selected as totems are so
selected because of their usefulness, normally as food or in terms
of some other economic ‘good’ (e.g. as raw materials, etc.). This
he rejects, since, on the one hand (to take animals used as
totems), many animals found in the totemic schemata are not
necessarily of much (if any) economic importance, and, moreover, 
by no means occupy a place in the ritual hierarchy which
would correspond to their degree of importance from a utilitarian 
point of view. Thus, to take illustrations from the totems
of one single clan of the Wanindiljaugwa tribe of Groote
Eylandt, Northern Territory of Australia — whom I studied in
1953 as a Research Scholar of the Australian National University
— parrot fish, dugong, paperbark, and cypress pine are all
valiiéd either aS foods or as raw material, but the echidna,
scrub fowl, goose, or crow are not so valued, either because
they are not regarded as edible, or because they are rarely
encountered. The presence of the Northwest wind as a further
totem of this clan raises a problem, however, for clearly it is
not used either for food or for raw material. One can argue that
it is of ‘economic’ significance, either because it fills the sails
of the aborigines’ canoes, or — more convincingly — because this
wind symbolizes the wet season of the year. But this argument
involves such a radical extension of the notion of ‘economic
interest’ from simple, specific, and direct utility in production

