
Claude Lévi-Strauss

meeting-place of all the groups who anxiously await the arrival
of their ‘saviour’, whereas the salmon goes up both rivers
indiscriminately. Thus the Nisqa lived in one valley, and the
Tsimshian in two.

Since this is so, all the natives are able to conceptualize the
duality Nass/Skeena as an opposition which correlates with
that of candlefish/salmon. There can be no doubt about it,
since the myth which lays the foundation of this opposition was
recorded by Boas in two practically identical versions, one in
Nass dialect, the other in Skeena dialect. But an opposition
which is recognized by all need not have the same significance
for each group. The Tsimshian lived through this opposition in
the course of each year; the Nisqa were content to know about
it. Although a grammatical construction employing couplets of

The Story of Asdiwal

tion is about to vanish, the image is inverted and becomes clear
again. This experiment is used in schools to demonstrate the
propagation of light in straight lines, or in other words to prove
that rays of light are not transmitted at random, but within the
limits of a structured field.

This study is in its own way an experiment, since it is limited
to a single case, and the elements isolated by analysis appear in
several series of concomitant variations. If the experiment has
helped to demonstrate that the field of mythical thought, too,
is structured, then it will have achieved its object.

The candlefish (olachen) is a small very oily fish caught in very large
numbers. Valued mainly for its oil, the meat can be eaten in times of scarcity
I [E.R.L.].
2. Hatsenas (Boas, 1912), Hadsenas (Boas, 1895): it is a bird like the robin
but not a robin (Boas, 1912, pp. 72-73). In another myth the robin announces
the summer (cf. Boas, 1912, pp. 200-201). The term ‘robin’ is applied to a
variety of birds by the English and the Americans. It would be rash to try to
identify the species. According to Boas (1895), Hadsenas means ‘luck’, and
j describes a bird sent as a messenger from Heaven (p. 286).

be antithetical terms is present in the Tsimshian tongue as a very
ns obvious model, and probably presents itself as such quite
nf consciously to the speaker,® its logical and philosophical
Ny implication would not be the same in each of the two groups.
a The Tsimshian use it to build up a system which is global and I
i coherent but which is not communicable in its entirety to
Dy people whose concrete experiences are not stamped with the
i same duality; perhaps, also, the fact that the course of the Nass
Ma is less definitely orientated from East to West than is that of
: the Skeena adds to the obscurity of the topographical schema
Tig (among the Nisqa).
Thus we arrive at a fundamental property of mythical
i thought, other examples of which might well be sought elsewhere. 
When a mythical schema is transmitted from one
; population to another, and there exist differences of language,
! social organization or way of life which make the myth difficult

a to communicate, it begins to become impoverished and confused.

In this work, which has no linguistic pretentions, the transcription of native
terms has been simplified to the extreme, keeping only those distinctions
which are essential for avoiding ambiguities between the terms quoted.

3. The name Asdiwal certainly has several connotations. The Nass form,
Asi-hwil, means ‘Crosser of Mountains’ (Boas, 1902, p. 226) but cf. also
‘asdiwal’, ‘to be in danger’ (Boas, 1912, Glossary, p. 257) and Asewaelgyet: a
different name for and special variety of the Thunder Bird (Barbeau, 1950,
Vol. I, pp. 144-145 and Vol. II, p- 476).

4. For a summary and comparative analysis of all the texts which have been
listed as referring to the greed of the Demiurge, see Boas (1916, p. 636 ff.),
5. As the smallest mammal to appear in mythology, and also because in the
mythology of the Northwest Coast the mouse represents the animals of the
earth at their most modest level: that of domestic life. The mouse is in fact
the domestic animal of the earth. With this distinction she is entitled to the

: ; ; Z tiny offering of fat which drips from woollen ear-ornaments when they are
aN But one can find a limiting situation in which instead of being thrown into the fire in her honour.
: : : i iS j ted. 6. “The love of the master of the sea-lions and of his whole tribe increased
Ante finally obliterated by losing all its outlines, the myth is inverte y
} fies very much’ (Boas, 1912, p. 133).
* and regains part of its precision.

7. The Tsimshian of the Nisga group ‘look to the river [Nass] for their food
supply, which consists principally of salmon and candlefish, Indeed it is owing
to the enormous numbers of the latter fish that run in to spawn in the early

Similar inversions occur in optics. An image can be seen in
I full detail when observed through any adequately large

aperture. But as the aperture is narrowed the image becomes

blurred and difficult to see. When, however, the aperture is
further reduced to a pinpoint, that is to say, when communica-

spring that the name Nass meaning “‘the stomach, or food depot” has been
given to the river’. (G. T. Emmons, 1910).

8. In Lévi-Strauss’s writings the notion of a structured conceptual scheme
(schéme conceptuel), which lies at the back of explicit cultural forms and