

§, A rough hierarchy of levels would seem to be represented
mandala, which is a fourfold symbolic image of the real self,’ I
was an intricately and deeply carved Oriental wood design
a fourfold form. The center of the design was an empty hol
through which the fearsome force of the universe whistled,

If the hypnogogic is explored just deeply enough to see fee!
ing form into words and to catch autonomously appearing in
ages and words, the experience begins to modify ordinary daily
life. Having caught images and words popping into 
from nowhere, you begin to see them also in daily life. You
better recognize the autonomous given. What you might
mally have accepted as your own thought begins to be seen a
“out of the blue.” You begin to feel much more like an obsereve
of a process rather than the only one ruling your own head
Your own head and experience becomes more like a meet:
place of many. The individual becomes a bit more modest ab
his own processes. It is as though he has begun to experience:
the rolling hills and distant seas of the psyche and feels mu
less presumptuous about his own scope. Yet, as the individ
sees the inner acting playful and wise, he gains more confidence
in beauty and wisdom within. It is a somewhat odd world
within, and yet it is a “handsome breath.”

Summary

1. Images seen with eyes closed (eigenlichts), the hypnogogic
state, and dreams are perhaps on a single continuum. "
2. It is difficult to poise between sleeping and waking in the
hypnogogic state. Most of the early lessons in this state involve
learning to keep one’s ego quiet so inner processes can emerge.

3. The great advantage of the hypnogogic state is that ego can
observe and even deal with processes that are autonomous and
outside its bounds. q

4. There may be levels in this state that may relate to one’s

(a) random bits of images and phrases;

(b) experiences that are pretty clearly autosymbolic or 
representative of one’s state at that moment;

(c) hypnogogie experiences that are instructive, including the
possibility of questioning the process and learning from it;

(d) hypnogogic experiences that break into trancelike periods
of enlightenment.

6, Experiences with this state tend to:

(a) make one able to see similar experiences in normal 
consciousness;

(b) make one less presumptuous of his personal powers and,
correspondingly;

(c) make one more confident of beauty and wisdom in the
natural depths of mind.

