Memory might help clarify the whole catalog of internal processes
they were seen as points in a continuum of differentiation.
The vaguest feeling is the undifferentiated end of the continuum.
Specific thoughts, words, memories, images, acts are
the multiple outputs of the differentiated end of the continuum.
these multiple outputs are related (words in my head are
related to words said are related to acts, etc.). Essentially it is the
underpinnings, the undifferentiated source of these endproducts, 
that is most elusive to us. We more or less identify
with the differentiated end-products. Some identify with these
products to the exclusion of their feeling source. As we look
closer at processes that primarily represent the life of feeling
(fantasy, hypnogogic state, dreams), we have more difficulty
identifying with this feeling base as our own making. When the
feeling base handily spins off symbolic ideas and images it
becomes even more difficult to name it as our own doing. Yet,
if it is not fully our own doing, then neither are its products (our
thoughts, actions, etc.).

The issue is where one will pin one’s personal identity. What
ean one say “Yea, that is myself!” to? If I say “I make these
words,” then I must defend control over the whole feeling
process underlying them. Yet we will see later that feeling can
also speak symbolic ideas that few even understand! It is enough
to indicate clearly at this juncture that the J—what I really call
me-mine and take responsibility for—is best not limited yet. It
is a fundamental issue. This is no minor, simple question. One
fundamental answer that emerges from the study of many
myths, religions, and one’s own experience is: let the personal
identity be everything and nothing simultaneously. When one
@arefully explores the boundaries of personal identity they expand 
beyond all expectations. The broadening of these boundaries may well 
be the root of wisdom.

When some feel the necessary humility of leaving open their
identity, they feel to have a name, to say I, reflects a lack of

