I just wanted to cry out that wanting depends 
on the devil knows what, and thank God, perhaps, 
for that, but I remembered about this science and
backed off, And just then you started talking. And indeed
well, if one day they really find the formula for all our wanting 
and caprices—that is, what they depend on, by precisely
what laws they occur, precisely how they seem to
strive for in such-and-such a case, and so on a
real, mathematical formula, that is—then perhaps man will
immediately stop wanting; what’s more, perhaps he will 
certainly stop. Who wants to want according to a little table?
Moreover: he will immediately turn from a man into a s =
in an organ or something of the sort; because what is : ;
without desires, without will, and without wantings,
 want pure rubbish precisely because, in our stupidity,
we see this rubbish easiest path to the attainment of
wine prconceived profit./Well, but when it’s all explained,
worked out on a piece of paper (which is quite possible because, 
after all, it’s vile and senseless to believe beforehand
that there are certain laws of nature which man will never ,
learn)—then, to be sure, there will be no more so-called desires. 
For if wanting someday gets completely in cahoots with
reason, then essentially we shall be reasoning and not wanting, 
because it really is impossible, for example, while preserving reason, 
to want senselessness and thus knowingly go
against reason and wish yourself harm... And since all 
wantings and reasonings can indeed be calculated—because, after
all, they will someday discover the laws of our so-called free
will—then consequently, and joking aside, something like a

‘Tittle table can be arranged, so that we shall indeed want
according to this little table. For if it should someday be
worked out and proved to me that when I made a fig at such
and-such a person, it was precisely because I could not do
otherwise, and that I was bound to do it with such-and-such
a finger, then what is left so free in me, especially if I am a
learned man and have completed a course of studies somewhere?
 No, then I can calculate my life for thirty years
ahead; in short, if this does get arranged, then we really will
have no choice; we'll have to accept it in any case. 
And, generally, we ought tirelessly to repeat to ourselves that, precisely
at such-and-such a moment, in such-and-such circumstances,
nature does not ask our permission; that it must be accepted as
it is, and not as we fancy, and if we are really aiming at a little
table and a calendar, and . . . well, and even at a retort, then
there’s no help for it, we must accept the retort! Or else it will
get accepted of itself, without you ...”

Yes, sirs, but for me that’s just where the hitch comes! You
will forgive me, gentlemen, for philosophizing away; it’s a