if, however, irritated by all this chatter (and I already feel you are irritated)
you decide to ask me: what precisely am I?—then I will 
answer you: I am one collegiate assessor.' I served so
something to eat (but solely for that), and when last anal
of my distant relations left me six thousand roubles in his will
I resigned at once and settled into my corner. I lived in hid
corner before as well, but now I’ve settled into it. My room is
wretched, bad, on the edge of the city. My servant is a village
woman, old, wicked from stupidity, and always bad-smelling,
besides. I’m told that the Petersburg climate is beginning to
do me harm, and that with my negligible means life in Petersburg 
is very expensive. I know all that, I know it better than
all these experienced and most wise counsellors and waggers
of heads.? But I am staying in Petersburg; I will not leave
Petersburg! I will not leave because. . . Eh! but it’s all 
completely the same whether I leave or not.


So then I, too, will speak about myself.

I WOULD Now LIKE to tell you, gentlemen, whether you
do or do not wish to hear it, why I never managed to become 
even an insect. I'll tell you solemnly that I wanted man
times to become an insect. But I was not deemed worthy et
of that. I swear to you, gentlemen, that to be overly conscious
Is a sickness, a real, thorough sickness. For man’s everyday
use, ordinary human consciousness would be more as
enough; that is, a half, a quarter of the portion that falls to
the lot of a developed man in our unfortunate nineteenth
century, who, on top of that, has the added misfortune of
residing in Petersburg, the most abstract and intentional city
on the entire globe. (Cities can be intentional or unintentional.) 
As much consciousness, for example, as that by which
all so-called ingenuous people and active figures live would
be quite enough. I'll bet you think I’m writing all this out of
swagger, to be witty at the expense of active figures; and
swagger of a bad tone besides, rattling my sabre like my
officer. But, gentlemen, who can take pride in his sicknesses,
and swagger about them besides?

Though—what am I saying?—everyone does it; it’s their
sicknesses that everyone takes pride in, and I, perhaps, more
“than anyone. Let us not argue; my objection was absurd. But

all the same I am strongly convinced that not only too much
consciousness but even any consciousness at all is a sickness. I
stand upon it. But let us also leave that for a moment. Tell me
this: why was it that, as if by design, in those same, yes, in
those very same moments when I was most capable of being
conscious of all the refinements of “everything beautiful and
lofty,”*® as we once used to say, it happened that instead of
being conscious I did such unseemly deeds, such deeds as...
well, in short, as everyone does, perhaps, but which with me
occurred, as if by design, precisely when I was most conscious
that I ought not to be doing them at all? The more conscious
I was of the good and of all this “beautiful and lofty,” the
deeper I kept sinking into my mire, and the more capable I
was of getting completely stuck in it. But the main feature
was that this was all in me not as if by chance, but as if it had
to be so. As if it were my most normal condition and in no
way a sickness or a blight, so that finally I lost any wish to
struggle against this blight. I ended up almost believing (and
maybe indeed believing) that this perhaps was my normal
condition. But at first, in the beginning, how much torment I
endured in this struggle! I did not believe that such things