because I love all that is beautiful and lofty
An author has written “as anyone pleases”; I immediately
drink the health of “anyone who pleases,” because I love all
that is “beautiful and lofty.” For this I'll demand to be respected, 
I'll persecute whoever does not show me respect. I
live peacefully, I die solemnly—why, this is charming, utterly
charming! And I’d grow myself such a belly then, I’d fashion
such a triple chin for myself, I'd fix myself up such a ruby
ag that whoever came along would say, looking at me:

Now, there’s a plus! There’s a real positive!” And, think
what you will, it’s most agreeable to hear such comments in
our negative age, gentlemen.

B UT THESE ARE ALL golden dreams. Oh, tell me, who
first announced, who was the first to proclaim that man
does dirty only because he doesn’t know his real interests;
and that were he to be enlightened, were his eyes to be cridned
to his real, normal interests, man would immediately stop
doing dirty, would immediately become good and noble, because, 
being enlightened and understanding his real profit, he
would see his real profit precisely in the good, and it’s 
common knowledge that no man can act knowingly against his
own profit, consequently, out of necessity, so to speak, he
would start doing good? Oh, the babe! oh, the pure, innocent
child! and when was it, to begin with, in all these thousands
of years, that man acted solely for his own profit? 

What is to be done with the millions of facts testifying to how people
knowingl y, that is, fully understanding their real profit, would
put it in second place and throw themselves onto another
path, a risk, a perchance, not compelled by anyone or anything, 
but precisely as if they simply did not want the designated path, 
and stubbornly, willfully pushed off onto another ;
one, difficult, absurd, searching for it all but in the dark. I
So, then, this stubbornness and willfulness were really more
agreeable to them than any profit . . . Profit! What is profit?
And will you take it upon yourself to define with perfect
exactitude precisely what man’s profit consists in? And what
if it so happens that on occasion man’s profit not only may
but precisely must consist in sometimes wishing ‘what is bad
for himself, and not what is profitable? And if so, if there can
be such a case, then the whole rule goes up in smoke. 

What do you think, can such a case occur? You're laughing; laugh
then, gentlemen, only answer me: has man’s profit been calculated 
quite correctly? Isn’t there something that not only
has not been but even cannot be fitted into any classification?
Because, gentlemen, as far as I know, you have taken your
whole inventory of human profits from an average of statistical 
figures and scientifico-economic formulas. Because profit
for you is prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace, and so on and
so forth; so that a man who, for example, openly and knowingly 
went against this whole inventory would, in your opinion—well, 
and also in mine, of course—be an obscurantist tor a
complete madman, right? But here is the surprising thing:
how does it happen that all these statisticians, sages, and lovers
of mankind, in calculating human profits, constantly omit one
profit? They don’t even take it into account in the way it
ought to be taken, and yet the whole account depends on
that. It’s no great trouble just to take it, this profit, and include
it in the list. But that’s the whole bane of it, that this tricky
profit doesn’t fall into any classification, doesn’t fit into any
list. I, for instance, have a friend... Eh, gentlemen! but he’s
your friend as well; and whose friend is he not! Preparing to
do something, this gentleman will at once expound to you,
with great eloquence and clarity, precisely how he must needs
act in accordance with the laws of reason and truth. More-