

sorry about seven roubles? Maybe they'll think . . . Devil take
it! I’m not sorry about the seven roubles! I’m leaving this
minute! .. .”

Of course, I stayed.

I drank Lafite and sherry by the glassful in my grief. From
lack of habit I was quickly getting drunk, and as my 
drunkenness increased, so did my vexation. I suddenly wanted to
insult them all in the boldest fashion, and only then leave. To
seize the right moment and show myself; let them say: he’s
funny, but no dummy ...and...and...in short, devil take
them!

I insolently looked around at them all with bleary eyes. But
it was as if they had already forgotten me entirely ... They
were having a noisy, loud, merry time for themselves. Zverkov 
kept on talking. I began to listen. Zverkov was telling
about some magnificent lady whom he had finally driven to a
declaration (naturally he was lying like a horse), and that he
had been especially helped in this matter by his intimate
friend, some princeling named Kolya, a hussar, owner of
three thousand souls.

“And yet there’s no sign of this Kolya, owner of three
thousand souls, at your farewell party,” I suddenly butted in
to the conversation. For a moment everyone fell silent.

“So, now you're drunk,” Trudolyubov finally consented
to notice me, casting a sidelong, contemptuous glance in my
direction. Zverkov silently studied me as if I were a little
bug. I lowered my eyes. Simonov hurriedly began pouring
champagne.

Trudolyubov raised his glass; everyone did the same, except
for me.

“Your health, and a good journey!” he cried to Zverkov.
“To those old years, gentlemen, to our future! Hurrah!”

Everyone drank and fell to kissing Zverkov. I did not
budge; the full glass stood untouched before me.

Apropos of the Wet Snow 777

“You're not going to drink?” Trudolyubov, having lost all
patience, roared, turning to me threateningly.

“I wish to make a speech on my own part, separately . . .
and then I will drink, Mr. Trudolyubov.”

“Disgusting little stinker,” Simonov growled.

I straightened up on my chair and feverishly took my glass,
preparing for something extraordinary, and still not knowing
myself precisely what I was going to say.)

“Silence!” Ferfichkin called out in French. “Here comes
all kinds of f intelligence!” Zverkov listened very seriously,
realizing what was going on.

“Lieutenant Zverkoy, sir,’ “tf began, “et it be known to you
that I hate phrases, phrase-mongers, and tight-fitting waists .
That is the first point, and the second will follow forthwith.”

Everyone stirred greatly.

“Second point: I hate gallantry and gallantizers. Especially
gallantizers!

“Third point: I love truth, sincerity, and honesty,” I went
on almost mechanically, because I was already beginning to
go numb with horror, unable to understand how I could be
speaking this way ... “I love thought, M’sieur Zverkov; I
love true friendship, on an equal footing, and not... hm... I
love... However, why not? I, too, shall drink to your health,
M’sieur Zverkov. Charm the Circassian girls, shoot the enemies of the fatherland, and... and... To your health, M’sieur
Zverkov!”

Zverkov rose from his chair, bowed to me, and said:

“Much obliged to you.”

He was terribly offended, and even turned pale.

“Devil take it,” roared Trudolyubov, banging his fist on
the table.

“No, sir, it’s a punch in the mug for that!” Ferfichkin
shrieked.

“He ought to be thrown out!” Simonov growled.