

“Indeed,” he reflected, “this morning may have seen the extinctiol
of the last roseate ray of love’s festival--so that henceforth my life]
to be warmed rather than lighted. Yes, life will swallow up lov
although secretly it will remain moved by its powerful springs, ant
its manifestations be of an invariably simple, everyday nature. Ye
the poem is fading, and stern prose is to follow--to follow with I
drab series of incidents which shall comprise a marriage ceremony
a journey to Oblomovka, the building of a house, an application
the local council, the laying out of roads, an endless transaction of
business with peasants, a number of improvements, harvests, and
so forth, the frequent spectacle of the bailiffs anxious fa
elections to the council of nobles, and sundry sittings on the local
bench.” Somewhere he could see Olga beaming upon him, an¢
singing Casta Diva, and then giving him a hasty kiss before he wen
forth to work, or to the town, or to interview the bailiff. Guest
would call (a no very comforting prospect!), and they would talk
about the wine which each happened to be brewing in his vats
about the number of arshins of cloth which each happened to hav
rendered to the Treasury. What would this amount to? What was Il
he was promising for himself? Was it life? Whether life or not, It
would have to be lived as though it, and it alone, constitutes
existence. At least it would be an existence that would find favour
with Schtotz but the actual wedding ceremony--that, at all events, would
represent the poetry of life, its nascent, its just opening flower? He
pictured himself leading Olga to the altar. On her head there would
be a wreath of orange-blossoms, and to her gown a long train, and
the crowd would whisper in amazement. Shyly, and with gently
heaving bosom and brow bent forward in gracious pride, she woul (
give him her hand in complete unconsciousness that the eyes of all
were fixed upon her. Then a bright smile would show itself on her
face, the tears would begin to well, and for a moment or two thi
furrow on her forehead would twitch with thought. Then, wher
they had arrived home and the guests had all departed, she, yes,
she--clad still in her gorgeous raiment--would throw herself upon
his breast as she had done that morning!

Unable any longer to keep his fancies to himself, he went with
them to Olga. She listened to him with a smile; but when’ he
jumped up with the intention of informing also her aunt she
frowned with such decision that he halted in awe.

‘Not a word to any one!” she said. "The right moment is not yet
come.”

“What ought we to do first, then?
"To go to the registrar, and to sign the record.”
“And then?”

"After marriage to go and live at Oblomovka, and to see what can
be done there.”

“We shall not be able to do that, for the house is in ruins, and a
new one must first be built.”

“Then where are we to live?”
“We must take a flat in town.”
“Then you had better go at once and see about it.”

“Alas!” was Oblomov’s reflection. “Olga wishes for ever to be on the
move. Apparently she cares nothing about dreaming over the
poetical phases of life, or losing herself in reveries. She is like
Schtoltz. It would seem as though the two had conspired to live life
fl top speed.”