

Nor any decency, by that lack of vision. I will extenuate only by
saying that I have seen you write letters and memoranda—or, more
accurately, not the writing but the products themselves—that surpass
in thought, complexity, and art what I would be overjoyed to include
as a note in the first issue of the Scribes Journal. I meant no indecency
with my impetrations, even if the result was indecent.

I cheerfully withdraw my request, and beg your forgiveness.

Later that afternoon came another memo from Charlie. He was serious
about wanting to contribute:

October 4, 1989
TO: BRYAN A. GARNER

FROM: CHARLES ALAN WRIGHT
Via Hand Delivery

“O reason not the need!” said poor mad old Lear, and in this case I am
with him.'°

May I please have answers to the questions I put to you in the
penultimate paragraph of my memorandum to you of even date?

The “hand delivery” notation on these memos means a different thing
for him and for me, by the way. On his, it means that he had one of his
secretaries—either Miss Bartsch or Mrs. Kieke—bring his memos to me,
On mine, it means that I personally took my memos to his secretaries. I~
had one memo left to write on that fateful October day:

October 4, 1989
4:55 p.m.

TO: CHARLES ALAN WRIGHT
FROM: BRYAN A. GARNER
By hand delivery

In writing my previous memorandum to you, I addressed only the
questions in the ultimate paragraph of yours, where you let fly the
upshot, I no longer thought of the questions in the penultimate, much
less the antepenultimate, paragraph.

You might develop the thought that you have already so well
expressed to Judge Haynsworth, namely, how well Judge Friendly used
literary allusions that, even if they were unfamiliar to the reader, 
nevertheless aided the reader’s comprehension. That is a rare art indeed. I see

' Bernard J. Ward, in a 1971 letter to Judge J. Braxton Craven, Jr., quoted in
Wright, The Wit and Wisdom of Bernie Ward, 61 Texas L. Rev. 13, 27 (1982),

BPENPAANSY 2 Aw FAD NSESY ee ae ae een ee eis eae ee EE EE EEE

no reason why you should be asked not to refer to DMLU. (But that
may simply be another manifestation of my indecency.)

Seriously, though, I realize now that I have asked too much. It is
one thing to be as indebted to another human being as much as I
already am to you; it is quite another to presume to increase the debt
beyond all reasonable limits. Please therefore ignore the penultimate
paragraph of this memorandum, and thereby help me preserve my
belatedly discovered sense of decency.

He didn’t ignore my request, and he has now contributed three pieces
to the Scribes Journal.'! I haven’t imposed on him any further since 1993—
at least not for the Journal.

In corresponding with Charlie, I often felt that his side of the letters
oiight to be published. He sometimes refers to what historians will one
day make of our letters. As with his comment in the very first letter I
wceived—the one saying that the soundness of my book was demonstrated 
by the fact that he agreed with it—I wonder whether it’s a joke
or a straight-faced comment. Whatever the answer is, I also earnestly
ligpe that our letters won’t be made public until the year 2020 or so.
Though I’m sharing a few of the letters here, historians should have to
wait awhile.
Hyut just in case that doesn’t happen, I might as well share the most
embarrassing exchange I ever had with Charlie. It happened on Februwy 14, 1989. 
By then, of course, Charlie and I had seen each other and
dined together many times. He had even sent me a birthday card the
_ jvevious November (and has always done so since). When I arrived that
Mierning from Dallas, I had an e-mail from Charlie with only three
words: “Where’s my valentine?” I puzzled over this for a few minutes,
ad then responded: “I hadn’t realized that you expected one. Happy
Vilentines!” This embarrassed me somewhat, but it was nothing comapared 
to the embarrassment I felt when he sent me his next message:

