

chopped forty-five, the full-sized wonder nine—all laid
out like toys beneath a Christmas tree. She goes behind
the curtains, reappears with a wooden easel, and places a
poster on it. A musical flourish from the 1890’s plays. The
poster says CONCEALMENT ARTIST. Scattered applause. The
man on stage bows. Raises his hands. The sleeves of his
jacket fall away from his forearms, exposing vague tattoos.

—My background is best left to the imagination, the
artist says. As are all of ours.

He twists, turns, spirals. The guns disappear. Enter two
men in police uniforms. The artist places his hands palms
down on the stand, bends forward.

One policeman draws his revolver and holds it on the
artist. The other policeman frisks the artist, comes up
empty-handed. The policemen switch roles. The second
cop finds nothing. Applause. The artist bows.

The woman brings out a unicycle. The artist mounts to
applause. He goes forward and backward, stands on the
pedals, almost flips. No weapon falls. He leaps like a
ballerina, lands tiptoed on the seat of the rolling unicycle.
It is only an instant, but the effect seems longer. He hops
off, bows, and flips into a series of quick cartwheels
around the stage.

While he towels off with a silk scarf, the spangled lady
pushes a safe on stage. She handcuffs the artist and pushes
him inside. His head sticks out through a hole in the top.
She cuts the safe, and apparently the artist, in half with
an acetylene torch and wheels the lower half of the safe
around the stage. The upper half hangs fixed in the air.
The artist’s eyes follow the progress of the lower half. His
head and the top of the safe spin slowly, then quickly. The
woman places the lower half beneath the upper half. The
upper half drops slowly, still spinning, and screws itself
onto the lower half. The artist’s head disappears into the
safe. He pops the door open and leaps out, free of the
handcuffs.

The woman sets up a card table and two folding chairs
and exits center stage. The Concealment Artist sits down.
A screen drops from the ceiling. A picture of the President
is projected on the screen. The Concealment Artist
stands. The picture changes. Now it is a senator.

The artist stands in the light of the projection. He
strikes the eighteen martial postures. The projector shuts
down. The theater is pitch black. Eddie coughs. Someone
answers with a far away cough. Silence. A long pause.
‘The lights come up.

Eddie finds himself on stage. He scans the audience but
cannot see beyond the third row. Dolores is lost to him.
‘The lights are hotter than he imagined. The Concealment
Artist looms large. He is gigantic, six-four or -five with
upper arms as big as Eddie’s thighs and hands like cafeteria trays. 
He invites Eddie to frisk him. Eddie gives him
a perfunctory patting down, hands trembling.

The audience giggles. The artist says something Eddie
does not catch. The giggles become a roar of laughter.
‘The artist pushes Eddie to a folding chair. Eddie sits at the
card table. The artist walks center stage. The lights go
down; a spot hits the artist. Eddie looks at the vinyl table
top. It is torn and has been patched with a piece of duct
tape. He looks up—dark, empty space. The artist produces the pistols,
 beginning with the forty-five and working his way down to the humble mini-derringer. Each
comes out of his clothes easily, naturally, with a little
flourish of his hand. Burst of applause.