
Eddie nods again.
——Trying to bring us down? the Colonel says.
Easy, Fritz says. How about a fresh drink?

—TIm easy, the Colonel says. Just asking a question,
An easy question at that.
—Huh, Eddie says.

—It’s not like I’m going to stand him on his fucking
head, the Colonel says.

— Our friend, here, suffered a loss, Fritz says. His wife
and dog, home and family —

Eddie bends down his head and cries.

—Is he sick? Fritz’s boy says.

—Don'’t, Eddie says, ever speak their names.

—I get you, Fritz says.

—No names, the Colonel says. He’s that much sense
at least. At first, I wasn’t sure.

—How about another, Colonel? Fritz says. Another —
story of the battles we’ve won. I
The Colonel and Fritz laugh. Fritz walks from behind —

the bar and throws his arm around the Colonel.
They sing:

The damage I’ve done,

And the battles I’ve won,

The past I’ll disclose,

And the secrets I’ll enclose,

We've had troubles and guns,

Now the dirty deed’s done,

And my love for you, dear, has just begun.

Fritz goes up on tiptoe for the last line, stumbles. The
Colonel catches him. The guests applaud and whistle.
Fritz sits on a stool next to Eddie.

Glass 119

—I got a rich one, he says. Tell me, Ed, are you
familiar with the boxer in the cage?

Eddie grunts.

The Colonel shakes his head.

—We had this philosophy professor, Fritz says. From
a major university, yet. How the hell he ended up in our
hands, who knows? This was the old detention center,
with cages where the guards walked overhead on catwalks. 
Foreign design. Called them tiger cages. So the
professor goes in the cage. Fat, lazy bastard with spectacles. 
We figured he’d go nuts without his books. At first it
looked that way, but then he started to work out. Shadow
box. He’d box and box and run in place and do push-ups
and so forth, all fucking day, every fucking day. And it
worked. Old fatty trimmed down and muscled up, but it
affected his mind as well. They call him out of the cage,
and he won’t budge. Won’t answer to his name. Insists
he’s a fighter. So Stan Leary goes in after him, and sure
enough, he breaks Stan’s jaw in three places with a left
hook.

The Colonel laughs.

Eddie puts his head down on the bar.

—Of course, Fritz says, we had to shoot him.

—How about that movie? the Colonel says.

—Soon enough, Fritz says. We haven’t finished the
preliminaries. He reaches over the bar and gets a deck of
cards. — Little three-hand, eh, boys? He elbows Eddie in
the ribs. — How about whippin’ the old third hand out?

The Colonel sits on the other side of Eddie. Fritz deals
each of the men three cards, face down. Eddie tosses off
a mug of beer, then another.

—Who was at the house that night? Eddie says.

—Like I know, Fritz says.