##Arrays and Hashes Chapter 4

variable’s value equals $§middleIndex, then the middle element of the subarray is
output, followed by an asterisk (*) to highlight that element as the middle element. 
For allother control variable values, that element of the subarray is displayed. 
Notice in line 33 the new operator I I —the logical OR operator.

The if/elsif/else structure in lines 51-60 performs the most important logic of
the binary search. If $searchKey equals the middle of the current subarray, the search is
complete, so $index is assigned $middleIndex and $found is assigned I (true). If
$searchKey is less than the middle element’s value, then the search must continue in the
first half of the subarray. So, line 56 adjusts the $highIndex by assigning it the index
one less than $middleIndex. For all other $searchKey values, line 59 adjusts the
$LowIndex by assigning it the index one greater than $middleIndex, which enables
the search to continue in the second half of the subarray. When the while loop at line 28
terminates, lines 64 through 69 display an appropriate message indicating whether or not
the $searchKey was found.

Introduction to Hashes

The second multivalued (nonscalar) data type that is fundamental to the Perl language is
the hash, or associative array. A hash is an unordered collection of key-value pairs. Rather
than accessing a hash element with a subscript like an array, elements in a hash are accessed
using a string known as a key. Each key must be unique. Hashes are sometimes known as
associative arrays, because they define associations between keys and their values.

Common Programming Error 4.12

The keys in a hash must be unique. Using the same key more than once in a hash causes the
original value for that key to be replaced with a new value; this situation could be a logic
error, or it could be a normal update operation.

The special symbol for a hash is %. Hashes are implementations of a data structure
known as a hash table. Chapter 20, “Data Structures,” provides more insight into the inner
workings of hashes. For now, we simply show you how to use them.

Because each value has an associated key, hashes take up more space than arrays.
However, the internal structure of a hash provides fast lookup capabilities through which a
value can often be located in one operation. ;

Hashes are particularly useful in situations where extremely fast retrieval of values is 
reaquired.


Hashes require more memory than arrays. Often, there is a delicate balance between the time
SES" I i+ takes to locate values and the amount of memory required to maintain the data. These issues are normally categorized as space-time trade-offs.

4.13 Creating and Manipulating a Hash

Like arrays, hashes can be created in two ways: either by assigning a list to the hash variable
or by assigning values to single elements. Figure 4.15 shows the creation of a hash and the
tle me tee me ameratar.auhioh we: havannauanuarad vet.



Fig. 4.15 Creating and using hashes,

Lines 6 and 7 define a hash by assigning a list to a hash variable (%hash). As with
arrays, a hash variable can have any valid identifier as a name, including the same
used here. Here, we introduce the “corresponds to” operator, =>. This operator is simil
(o the comma operator, except that it interprets its left-side operand as a string, so no —
ane to be placed around the string. The first value in this list (width) is the key of the
lirst element to be created in the hash, and the second value in the list ("300") is the val
that corresponds to that key. The list elements are grouped this way into key-value - a,
So, the value height is the key for the second element in the hash, and the amettty fa
responding value is '150'. Lines 8 and 9 display the individual hash elements Note tha t
you can access a key’s corresponding value by preceding the hash name with a$ and
