

Indeed, I urge you to welcome exile. It frees you from all the
entanglements of your own locality, and allows you to enjoy the
severe in the wilderness. ‘Lo,’ says the Psalm, ‘then would I wander
far off, and remain in the wilderness’ (Ps. 55: 7). If possible, do not
visit a town at all. For you will find there nothing of benefit, nothi
useful, nothing profitable for your way of life. To quote the Psaln
again, ‘Ihave seen violence and strife in the city’ (Ps. 55:9). 

So seek out places that are free from distraction, and solitary. 
Do not be afraid of the noises you may hear. Even if you should see some
demonic fantasy,* do not be terrified or flee from the training
ground so apt for your progress. Endure fearlessly, and you will see
the great things of God, His help, His care, and all the other
assurances of salvation. For as the Psalm says, ‘I waited for Him who
delivers me from distress of spirit and the tempest’ (Ps. 55:8.
ERX). 

Do not let restless desire overcome your resolution; for ‘restlessness of 
desire perverts the guileless intellect’ (Wisd. 4:1 2). Many
temptations* result from this. For fear that you may go wrong, stay
rooted in your cell. If you have friends, avoid constant meetings
with them. For if you meet only on rare occasions, you will be of
more help to them. And if you find that harm comes through meeting
them, do not see them at all. The friends that you do have should be
of benefit to you and contribute to your way of life. 

Avoid associating with crafty or aggressive people, and do not live with anyone
of that kind but shun their evil purposes ; for they do not dwell close
to God or abide with Him. Let your friends be men of peace,
spiritual brethren, holy fathers. It is of such that the Lord speaks
when he says: ‘My mother and brethren and fathers are those who
do the will of My Father who is in heaven’ (cf. Matt. 12:49—-50).
Do not pass your time with people engaged in worldly affairs or
share their table, in case they involve you in their illusions and
want to do. Do not listen to their words or accept the thoughts of
their hearts, for they are indeed harmful. Let the labour and longing
of your heart be for the faithful of the earth, to become like them in
mourning. For ‘my eyes will be on the faithful of the land, that they
may dwell with me’ (Ps. 101:6). 

If someone who lives in accordance with the love of God comes to you
 and invites you to eat, go if you wish, but return quickly to your cell. 
If possible, never sleep outside your cell, so that the gift of stillness
may always be with you. Then you will be unhindered on your chosen path.

Do not hanker after fine foods and deceitful pleasures. For ‘she
that indulges in pleasure is dead while still alive’, as the Apostle
says (i Tim. 5:6). Do not fill your belly with other people’s food in
1a you develop a, longing for it, and this longing makes you want
teat at their table. For it is said: ‘Do not be deceived by the filling
if the belly’ (Prov. 24:15. LXX), If you find yourself continually
invited outside your cell, decline the invitations. For continual
absence from your cell is harmful. It deprives you of the grace of

c