
“The Apostle calls this virtue ‘the sun’, as we can see from the
saying: ‘Do not let the sun go down upon your anger’ 

It is also called ‘the guidance’ of our lives, as when it is w
“Those who have no guidance fall like leaves’ (Prov. 11:14
Scripture also refers to it as the ‘discernment’ without which
must do nothing — not even drink the spiritual wine that ‘
glad the heart of man’ (Ps. 104:16. LXX); for it is said: ‘Dy
with discernment’ (Prov. 31:3. LXX); and: ‘He that does not d
things with discernment is like a city that is broken down
without walls’ (Prov. 2 5:28. LXX). Wisdom, intellection
perceptiveness are united in discrimination: and without these I
inner house cannot be built, nor can we gather spiritual wealtlh
it is written: ‘Through wisdom a house is built, through 
understanding it is established, and through good judgment its 
storehouse will be filled with wealth’ (Prov. 24: 3-4. LXX). 
without the gift of discriminati no virtue can stand or rem
firm to the end, for it is the mother of all the virtues and th
guardian.”

‘This was Antony’s statement, and it was approved by the
fathers. But in order to confirm what St Antony said by mean
fresh examples from our own times, we should recall
Hiron and how a few days ago, as we ourselves saw, he was thrown
down from the height of the ascetic state to the depths of death 
in the nearby desert, following a life of great severity and the strife of
self-control, seeking out and living in parts of the desert wild
than those inhabited by any of the other monks there. This sam
man cast all the fathers and brothers of the nearby desert
inconsolable grief because, after so many labours and struggles
was deceived by the devil and suffered such a disastrous fall
would not have happened to him had he been armed with the virtue
of discrimination, which would have taught him to trust, not hi
own judgment, but rather the advice of his fathers and brethren
Following his own judgment he fasted and isolated himself to gs 1
a degree that he did not even come to church for the Holy Pasche
lest by meeting the fathers and brethren and feeding with them he