which ravages, confuses and darkens every soul and, when it is a
diabolical tree of bitterness, anger and wrath has its roots kept
these and similar virtues, discovers within itself the imprint of
divine image, and perceives the spiritual and ineffable beauty of I
divine likeness; and so, learning from itself, it attains the 
wisdom of the inner law.

Therefore, my son, refine the youthful impulses of yourself
and through the virtues we have described strengthen your 
soul and renew your intellect with the help of the Spirit. For I
flesh of youth, gorged with food and wine, is like a pig lead
slaughter. The flames of sensual pleasure kill the soul,
spirit is cooled.

Young people should particularly avoid drinking wine, and
getting the smell of it. Otherwise the inward action of pass
the wine poured in from outside will produce a double conflate
the combination of the two will bring the flesh’s sensual pleasure
boiling point, driving away the spiritual pleasure that accompany
the pain of contrition, and producing confusion and hardnened
heart. Indeed, their spiritual desire should prevent the young
drinking their fill even of water, for this is a great help to
self-restraint. If you try this for yourself, experience will show
that it really is so. For in recommending this rule we do not ¥
to impose on you a yoke of compulsion; but with love we ady
as an aid in attaining true virginity and strict self-restraint,
it to your own free choice to do as you wish.

Now let us say something about the senseless passion of a
makes those in whom it is easily and quickly aroused behave I
beasts. This passion is strengthened particularly by pride, and
long as it is so strengthened it cannot be destroyed. While
by the foul water of pride, it blossoms and thrives and pro
quantities of rotten fruit. Thus the structure of evil in the soul
impossible to destroy so long as it is rooted firmly in pride.

Do you want this tree of disorder — I mean the passion
bitterness, anger and wrath — to dry up within you and become
cast into the fire’ together with every other vice (Matt. 3:10
you want the destruction of this house of evil which the devil
into your soul by continually using as stones various plausible or
