

Everything created is alien to man. He is superior to all creatures 
because he is an image of God. A man is the image of God when he lives 
rightly and in a way that conforms to God. But he cannot live like this 
unless he detaches himself from worldly things. Now a man whose intellect enjoys
he love of God is fully aware that everything beneficial to his soul
and all his devoutness come from this detachment. Such a man does
not blame another for sins he himself commits, This is the sign of a
youl in which salvation is at work.

Those who contrive to gain possession of transitory things
by force are. also attached. to their desire to act viciously. They 
ignore the death and destruction of their own soul, and do not
consider what is to their interest or reflect on what men suffer after
death because of wickedness.

89. Evil_is.a_passion adherent to matter, but God is not the
eause_of evil. He has given men knowledge and understanding, the
power of discriminating between good and evil, and free will. It is
man’s negligence and indolence that give birth to evil passions,
while God is in no way the cause. The demons, like most men,
have become evil as a result of the free choice of their own will.

90. The man who lives devoutly does not allow evil to slip into
his soul; and, no evil being present, his soul is safe from danger and
harm. Such a man is dominated neither by demon nor by fate, for
God delivers him from all evil and, protected like a god, he lives
unharmed. If he is praised, he laughs within himself at those who
praise him; if he is execrated, he does not defend himself against
those who mock him, and he never gets angry at what they say. _

gt. Evil clings closely to one’s nature, just as verdigris to copper
and dirt to the body. But the coppersmith does not create the
verdigris, nor do parents create the dirt. Likewise, it is not God who
has created evil. He has given man knowledge and discrimination so
that he may avoid evil, knowing that it harms and punishes him.
Thus when you see someone enjoying power and wealth, mind you
are never deluded by some demon into thinking him happy. Quickly
bring death before your eyes, and you will never.have a desire for
any evil or worldly object.

92. Our God has granted immortality to those in heaven, but
for those on earth He has created mutability, giving life and 
movement to the whole of creation; and all this for man’s sake. So do

81. If you are in a position of high authority, do not
threaten someone with death, knowing as you do that by:
too, are subject to death and that the soul sheds the Iv
shedding its last garment. Since you know this, be
merciful, always giving thanks to God. For he who has no:
has no virtue. att

82. To escape death is impossible. Knowing this, those ¥
truly intelligent and practised in virtue and in spiritual I
accept death uncomplainingly, without fear or grief,
it is inevitable and delivers them from the evils of this ]

83. We must not hate those who ignore the way of life
good and conforms to God’s will, and who pay no heed
teachings that are true and divine. Rather, we must show mu
them as being crippled in discrimination and blind in heart
For in accepting evil as good, they are destroyed by ignorance
being wretched and obtuse in soul, they do not know God.

84. Do not try to teach people at large about devoutney
right living. I say this, not because I begrudge them such tea
but because I think that you will appear ridiculous to th
For like delights in like: few — indeed, hardly any — listen
instruction. It is better therefore not to speak at all about
wills for man’s salvation. —

85. The soul suffers with the body, but the body does not
with the soul. Thus, when the body is cut, the soul suffers to
when the body is vigorous and healthy, the soul shares its well-h
But when the soul thinks, the body is not involved and do
think with it; for thinking is a passion or property of the
also are ignorance, arrogance, unbelief, greed, hatred, envy,
apathy, self-esteem, love of honour, contentiousness and
ception of goodness. All these are energized through the s

86. When meditating on divine realities, be full of goodi
free from envy, devout, self-restrained, gentle, as gen
possible, kindly, peaceable, and so on. For to conform
through such qualities, and not to judge anyone or to say
is wicked and has sinned, is to render the soul inviolate, (
should search out one’s own faults and scrutinize one’s
of life, to see whether it conforms to God. What concern is II
ours if another man is wi ? sre ‘
87. He who is truly a man tries to be devout; and he is dey