Show us how the events about to unfold are affecting the prologue
character now.

The Teaser
Though rarely used, the teaser can work on occasion. Mary Higgins Clark
has done it more than once.

In the teaser, you present a scene at the beginning that will happen later
on in the book. It’s like a preview of a coming attraction.

Why do it this way? Because you grab the reader with action. You
don’t play the scene to full fruition, leaving a mystery. You leave the reader
wondering, How did this character get herself into this predicament?

When you get to that scene in the novel, you then play it out, and
answer the reader’s initial question.

Some purists object to the teaser, as it is not adding anything to the
plot. It’s just using plot material earlier, they say.

To which one answer is, So what? If it functions to grab the reader and
create interest, then it is doing its job.

For a teaser, do this:

® Select a highly charged scene from your story.
¢ You may choose to use the exact same wording, or rework it a bit.
¢ Stop short of resolution, so you truly tease your readers to move on,

ESTABLISHING A BOND WITH THE READER
VIA THE LEAD CHARACTER

Before I started to sell my fiction, I had a major weakness with characters,
I would come up with a plot or situation, but I'd stock it with cardboard
story people, characters who seemed to be on the page just because I stuck
them there.

Then I happened across Lajos Egri’s advice about living, vibrating
human beings being the secret of great and enduring writing. Egri suggests
that if you truly know yourself, deeply and intimately, you will be able to
create great, complex, and interesting characters.

That’s because we have all experienced, to a greater or lesser degree,
every human emotion. By tapping into our emotional memories, we can
create an infinite variety of characters.

This is not a book on character creation though there is overlap. Plot
doesn't work without characters; the stronger your characters, the better
it plot. For your character work, I recommend reading Creating Dynamic
characters or Write Great Fiction: Characters, Emotion & Viewpoint, both by
Kress. Strong characters draw readers into your plot. This dynamic is
led the bond.

Ways to Establish the Bond

To conceive a compelling Lead character, you must go a step further
figure out how to create an emotional bond with the reader. You can
accomplish this by mastering four dynamics— identification, sympathy,
pility, and inner conflict.

the Lead character provides access to a plot, it follows that the more
reader can identify with the Lead, the greater the intensity of the plot
occurence. With identification, you create the wondrous feeling that this,
in some way, is happening to me.

Identification means, simply, that the Lead is like us. We feel that we

, under the right circumstances, find ourselves in the same position in
Mot, with similar reactions.

Lead appears to us to be a real human being.

What are the marks of a real human being? Look inside yourself. Most
you are: (1) trying to make it in the world; (2) a little fearful at times; I
le begins when Trisha gets lost, and why does she get lost? Because m
ttulantly stomps away from her mother to relieve herself. It’s such a z
¢, human response that we easily identify with it. That’s how King
us into his Lead character’s immediate crisis. z
isha’s not perfect. She has normal human flaws. :
pur key question here is: What does your Lead do and think that - y

nd iana Jones. In Raiders of the Lost Ark, it would have been tempting
ie him as some sort of superman, overcoming all odds without a