

HOW TO IMPROVE YOUR
PLOTTING EXPONENTIALLY

Chess players who want to improve their game and their rating go through
a set of drills every day for a period of time, drills designed to increase
their awareness and tactics. 

They practice routines, hour upon hour, in order to improve their ail

ite fighting forces drill relentlessl i i
y until everything g becomes second nature

So why should writing be any different?
You can do on your own that will give you huge return
in plotting ability. But like any worthwhile drill it’s work.
 Hard work.But if you will give yourself eight to twelve weeks 
to do this drill, youwill get a huge return on your writing investment. 
Guaranteed, Here’s what you do:

Step 1: Get half a dozen novels of the type you want to write. They cut
be novels you've already read or new ones. It doesn’t matter. When I
went through this drill at the beginning of my career, I went to a used
bookstore and bought an armload of paperbacks in the thriller genre.

Step 2: Make a schedule for your eight- to twelve-week program, so I
you ean stick to it. Youre going to have to give yourself time to read (lip
Six bowls through once and then spend approximately twelve hours
analyzing and making notes on the books in a way I will show you, aiid
then another six or so hours in reflection. .

Step 3: Read the first book. Read it for pleasure. Be the audience. When
yon cinta it, spend about one day just thinking about it. Did you like Wt
Did it move you? Were the characters memorable? Did the plot hang
together? Were there any times you felt the book dragged? And so lori
Make some notes on your answers. I I

Step 4: Now read the second book. Take a day to think about that one
asking the same questions as you did in the previous step. I

Step 5: Read the rest of the books in the same fashion.

Step 6: Now go back to the first book. You're going to need a set of
 index cards for this. Go through the book scene by scene. A chapter
may have more than one scene in it. Do this exercise by scenes. Mark
the first index card with a “Number 1” in the upper right hand corner,
aif you ever drop the cards on the floor you'll be able to put them back
in the right order. For each scene, write the following information on a
card: the setting; point-of-view character; a two-line scene summary;
and scene type (action, reaction, setup, deepening, etc.). Does the end
of the scene make you want to read on? Why or why not?

 Step 7: Repeat this drill for the rest of the books. You will now have six
stacks of index cards completely outlining the scenes in six novels. Save
these. They are gold. Over the years, you will come back to these cards
and look them over as detailed in the next step.

Step 8: Beginning with any stack you choose, go through the cards
quickly, reading the information, remembering the scene, and going
on to the next card. You are almost forming a movie in your head in
fast motion. Run through the plot of the book this way. Ingrain it in
your memory.

Step 9: Do the same with the other stacks of index cards. At this point,
youre going to have an incredibly powerful new sense of plot bubbling
in your brain. There’s still one more thing to do.

Step 10: Lay out one set of cards in order on the floor. Divide the cards
into the three-act structure. Using the information in chapter three of
this book, try to identify the various beats required in the beginning,
middle and end. Identify the scene or scenes that compose each door-
way of no return. Repeat with the other novels that your leisure.

If you follow these ten steps, you will jump ahead of 99 per-
‘ent of all the other aspiring writers out there, most of whom try to find out
jow to plot by trial and error. Not that there’s anything wrong with that
nethod if progress is being made. But you will have accomplished in twelve
weeks what someone else in a similar position might take years to duplicate.

INVERTING THE “RIFLE RULE”

The Russian playwright Anton Chekhov had a famous rule that went something 
like this: If the curtain opens for Act I and there’s a rifle on the wall, it
must be used at some point in the play. This is really a rule of expectation. If
you set something up, it must pay off.

AUYNLINAULS GNV LO1d YOd S1001 ANV SdiL