

For good or for bad the Jungian approach has been the linchpin of 
the modern mythological approach. The myth and ritual approach to 
literary criticism developed from Jungian psychology and the ethnological 
study of rituals. Rituals and archetypes in one sense fill the gap that 
develops as a result of the trend to repudiate the intellectual interpretation of myth. 

Theories of myth that have gone beyond vitalism and the one-dimensional
theories of Lévy-Bruhl and Jung merit serious attention. It is clear that 
the view of myth as irrational cannot be countered by returning to the past and to
the theories of Spencer and of Tylor, with their views of myth as a
means of satisfying the ingenuous curiosity of primitive man. By and
large, the semiotic and symbolic approaches to myth have gone well
beyond these early formulations, which is not to deny that both these
views, especially the symbolic approach, are in their own dimension.

The symbolic approach to myth was formulated by Cassirer, who
bases his theories on the neo-Kantian Marburg school. Cassirer’s 
Philosophy of Symbolic Forms reflects all the weaknesses of this school
but Cassirer does emphasize the intellectual uniqueness of mythological
thought. He sees mythology, as well as language and art, as a symbolic
cultural form characterized by a particular means of objectifying senso
input. But according to Cassirer, mytho-logic is a closed system the
unity of which derives from its functioning and from the specificity with
which it models the universe. Cassirer starts from function and structural 
forms of the popular imagination, although his is a static conception akin 
to Gestalt psychology. The framework of neo-Kantian transcendental conception 
of communication that he uses prevents Casstrer from fully understanding that 
the symbolism of myth is inseparable from social communication and that in 
fact myth is in part generated from its communicative function. Cassirer 
is also unable to demonstrate convincingly the autonomous nature of 
mythological thought.

Lévi-Strauss, however, describes the real functioning of the logical
mechanisms of mythological thought that generate semiotic systems, On
the one hand Lévi-Strauss examines the specific characteristics of thought-logic 
its metaphoric nature, the tendency to bricolage). On the
other (and unlike Lévy-Bruhl) he focuses on mythologic’s ability to
generalize, classify, and analyze. These are intellectual processes upon
which is erected the highly-efficient cultural edifice of archaic societies
The logical mechanisms he describes are largely akin to poetic thought,
though not entirely congruent. Lévi-Strauss concentrates on the 
cogntitive aspects of myth, but unlike similar nineteenth-century approaches,
his is based on modern ethnological and philosophical findings. However, 
Lévi-Strauss’s brand of structuralism has some weaknesses and
contradictions quite apart from the debatable nature of some of his
philosophical meanderings—for example, the opposition between the
semiotic and structural aspects of myth expressed in the dilemma of
whether language or music is the apt metaphor for understanding myth.

With the exception of the psychoanalytic theories, the theories reviewed 
here generally focus on primitive myth, but they do not ignore
the obvious analogies between myth and classical or even contemporary
cultures. In general, these theories refuse to attribute the specific 
characteristics of myth to a low economic or cognitive level of development.
They concentrate on the pragmatic functions of myth or, in the case of
the psychoanalytical theories, on its unconscious psychological underpinnings. 

Modern theories have by and large overcome the limitations of
the evolutionary perspective of the last century, the theory of survivals,
and the intellectual heritage of the Enlightenment tradition. The Nazi
attempt to revive German paganism and its ecstatic heroism contributed
to identifying myth with a form of social demagoguery. Researchers
were thus sensitized and encouraged to_de-mystify ideological myths.
This de-mystification has gradually been extended to all spheres of daily
life, with its little ‘myths’ and ‘rituals’. Of all the theoreticians of myth,
Lévi-Strauss has contributed the most to defining the barrier that separates 
the “hot” societies of the present from the “cold” societies of the
past, with their archaic cultures firmly grounded in a mythopoesis centered 
on semiotic and structural continuity. At the same time, Barthes,
an avowed structuralist, argues that contemporary societies are machined and
more mythological than those of the past.

Myth has undoubtedly played an important role in the creation of
various ideologies. As the reincarnation of the primitive syncretic mentality,
myth can be considered the prototype of modem ideological forms 
[Some characteristics of primitive thought—its concreteness, its
high emotional and sensory content, the unconscious and automatic
recourse to symbolic clichés, the presence of a sacred historical 
tradition—are partially reproduced in some social environments 
under particular conditions. One example is Western popular culture. In any case,
a tendency toward the ritualization of the social and individual aspects
of behavior exists in all societies and can even go so far as to create
surrogate forms of rites of passage.