
The importance of the mechanism of secularization is clearly visible
in Australian Aboriginal mythology. The sacred information on the
mythical journey of the ancestor is eliminated from totemic myths,
whereas more attention is paid to the family relationships, fights, and
duels that engaged the attention of the totemic ancestors. The adventurous 
aspect is also played up, with proportionally more freedom to invent
variations. Secularization does not immediately tead to conscious improvisation
 or to the audience’s belief that narration is invention, but
blind acceptance of the mythic narrative as truth becomes tinged with
doubt. This leaves the door open to even more improvisation, albeit still
within the confines of the genre and within the constraints of the
mythological semantic heritage.

in archaic folklore, the fabulistic imagination is as grounded in 
ethnographic reality as myth, whereas in the classical European fairy tale
this link to concrete popular beliefs no longer exists. The result is that
tales become conventionalized, with their own mythopoetics. For example, 
the mythical beings in Russian folk tales are different from those
found in dylinchki, which reflect the superstitions that have survived in a
particular environment. It is in fact this aspect of the mythopoetics of
the Russian folk tale that can be traced to ancient myths.

Secularization also means the demythification of the temporal dimension.
 Myths are usually set in the primordial time of creation and
situated within a set of precisely defined cosmological reference points,
whereas tales are rather lackadaisical about time and place. This leads to
a demythification of the consequences of events. Tales ignore the etiological 
aspects of primordial creation. The etiological sense in a myth is
transformed into a mere omamental appendage in tales. Gradually, etiology 
reemerges but only as the ‘moral’ tacked onto the end of an animal tale, 
or as the stylistic formula in the fairy tale that lets the audience
know that the story is not true—nothing more than a tale, in other
words.

Mythical time and etiology are inextricably intertwined with the
cosmic dimension of myth and its focus on the collective destiny of the
tribe, which to ali intents is humanity in general. The noble Promethean
sacrifice on behalf of humanity is not a prerequisite of myth, but it is
necessary that the actions of a demiurge have implications for the community 
and the universe at large, even when these actions evoke the
expedient frauds of a trickster. These acts determine the cosmogonic
process. Even when cosmic ‘conquests’ by humanity or its representative are
 negative and not acquisitive, such as reducing the number of
excess suns or stars or stopping earthly floods, the result is the same.

In tales, the objects to be acquired ot have
options for the organization of nature or culture. The 
prosaic: obtaining women, food, magical objects— this is
to ease the life of the hero. Instead of primordial we
distribution of the goods obtained by the hero. 
=n an old witch, or a serpent, to restore it to its proper place : Se
isiveonts the fairy tale hero might steal the same a aegel on 2 eer
his sick father. This theme is in fact found in ie hoes oeeeks
folklore, The fairy-tate hero steals fire with the is a akon ee
only for his own fireplace, for example, im ta © ean pe aon
fairy-tale hero—the hare, in the folklore of many i ol oT a by
cunning to steal water only for himself from a well t ema
her animals. The altruism of the good son in Hawaiian epetne

oe ism of the bare in African tales are both in contrast to the etiolog
and collective pacuaion of rea ae divind
The heroes of tales are no longer semi- 8 ¢ aah
if they are sometimes idealized by being given a irene ame
raculous birth, or totemic features: the son or so Seika cone
among North American Indians, or the descendant ) See is
down from the sky, like the Polynesian Tafaki; the son of t ie
folklore of many peoples. European folk tales aaeen ed an

miraculous birth of the hero, but this is often expresse

. hero is the son of a king, for example.
me any thification is helped by the interaction of mythic narration ané
of various types of bylinchki, whose protagonists ae rnin
sometimes nameless and always of obscure origin e acpi co
ues the process of demythification by using a pane i ciel
miliated hero who may be hated and persecuted y hi hana on
Even if his particular qualities—for example, he might e a e ia
foolish, ignorant, or dirty—have important a ana pee siege
logical level, the emphasis is placed on aera “ . Lai
numerous orphans in Melanesian folklore, in the -T °" Rehan
nd Tibetan mountain tribes, among the Eskimo, an vin
a d North American Indian myth, to name only a few groups. All
or t itt are in some way on the receiving end of persecution oF
protag sion, sometimes by the uncle’s wives (Melanesia) or by re a ves

ties (North America){ but the spirits come to the hero’s

the Classic Forms of Myth

ties or demiurges, even

i tepfense.IMarginal status is usually ascribed to younger brothers or to step
children like Cinderella.

Cyova