
We may conclude that, while Camorra has much to interest that
social movements within the ‘legitimate’ as distinct from
‘ctooked’ world only insofar as the poor of Naples tend to ideali
gangstets in a way vaguely reminiscent of social banditry. There
is no evidence that the Camorristi or magliari have ever deserved
any idealization whatsoever.

Of all the primitive social movements discussed in this
book, millenarianism is the one least handicapped by its
primitiveness. For the only thing really primitive about
it is external. The essence of millenarianism, the hope of 
a complete and radical change in the world which will be reflected in
the millennium, a world shorn of all its present deficiencies, is
not confined to primitivism. It is present, almost by definition,
in all revolutionary movements of whatever kind, and ‘millenarian’ 
elements may therefore be discovered by the student in
any of them, insofar as they have ideals. This does not mean that
therefore a// revolutionary movements are millennial in the
natrower sense of the word, let alone that they are primitive, an
assumption which deprives Professor Norman Cohn’s book of
some of its value.1 Indeed, it is impossible to make much sense
of modern revolutionary history unless one appreciates the differences 
between primitive and modern revolutionary movements,
in spite of the ideal which they have in common, that of a totally
new world.

The typical old-fashioned millenarian movement in Europe has
three main characteristics. First, a profound and total rejection
of the present, evil world, and a passionate longing for another
and better one; in a word, revolutionism. Second, a fairly standardized 
‘ideology’ of the chiliastic type as analysed and described by
Professor Cohn. The most important ideology of this sort before
the rise of modern secular revolutionism, and perhaps the only one,
is Judeo-Christian messianism. At all events it seems that classical
fnillenarian movements occur Only, ot practically only, in countries
affected by Judeo-Christian propaganda. This is only natural, for
it is difficult to construct a millenarian ideology within a religious

1 The Search for the Millennium (1957). This erudite study of many medieval
millennial movements is, to my mind, vitiated by a tendency to interpret
medieval in terms of modern revolutionary movements and the other way
round, a practice which clarifies neither our understanding of the Hussites
nor of modern Communism.