

for the younger children in a family session, protecting
them, and often dealing with quite serious problems without
letting the mother know about them.

In clinical organizations, this hierarchy is evident
wherever there are paraprofessionals. Usually, the hierarchy
includes a professional in charge, a paraprofessional who
actually takes charge, and the clientele. The paraprofessional 
is not really at the staff level and yet does the actual
work with clients and is blamed by the professional if there
is trouble. Often there are secrets between client and paraprofessional 
just as there are in families with parental children. This hierarchy 
is also typical in mental hospitals where the aides or attendants 
function as parental children because they are not professional staff 
members and yet are not at the level of patients. They have the 
responsibility but not the power and so must deal with the patients 
secretly on many issues, including on disciplinary issues.

It is arbitrary to differentiate one-generation from two or three-generation 
structures, since all situations involve multiple generations. Yet for practical 
reasons it can be helpful to focus on one set of levels rather than on another.

There are two typical patterns that appear as two-generation
problems.

The Overwhelmed Mother. In some families with many
children there is a mother who is in charge of everyone with
no hierarchy among the children. The center of whatever
happens, like the hub of a wheel, the mother has each child
go through her to deal with any other child. Such a mother
appears overburdened by constant demands from the children. 
This structure can be seen if one asks the children to
do something, such as draw something on the blackboard,
while the therapist talks to the mother. The children will
constantly interrupt to ask the mother something, show her
what they have done, ask her to settle arguments, and check
with her before doing anything. Such a structure is typical
of organizations where an administrator cannot delegate
authority and so remains in charge of everyone.

One Parent against Another. The most typical two generation problem 
is where one parent sides with a child against the other parent. 
The “child” can be two years old or forty years, since the problem 
is not age but organization. A depressed woman with several children 
may still be functioning as a child in the relationship with her parents. The
sequence can also take place when the parents are separated,
if they are still at odds over the child.

The typical sequence in this situation is as follows.

1. One parent, usually the mother, is in an intense
relationship with the child. By intense is meant a relationship
that is both positive and negative and where the responses
of each person are exaggeratedly important. The mother
attempts to deal with the child with a mixture of affection
and exasperation.

2. The child’s symptomatic behavior becomes more
extreme.

3. The mother, or the child, calls on the father for

’ assistance in resolving their difficulty.

4. The father steps in to take charge and deal with
the child.

5. Mother reacts against father, insisting that he is not
dealing with the situation properly. Mother can react with
an attack or a threat to break off the relationship with
father. The threat to leave may be as indirect as “I want a
vacation by myself,” or as direct as “I want a divorce.”

6. Father withdraws, giving up the attempt to disengage mother and child.

7. Mother and child deal with each other in a mixture
of affection and exasperation until they reach a point where
they are at an impasse.

This sequence can continue forever and ever as mother
(or father) crosses generation lines and sides with child
against the other parent. Another way to describe it is as an
intense involvement of one adult and child that regularly
includes and excludes the other adult.