
Participants were first given 27 problems that all involved 
one type of solution, namely changing an “X” to a “V.”
The goal was to prime the subjects to become fixed in one 
way of solving problems. Once people have learned to solve
a problem, past research has shown, they often struggle to 
generate solutions using a different approach. As economist John
Maynard Keynes put it, “The difficulty lies not in grasping the new ideas but
rather in escaping from the old ones.” The participants then received five
minutes of DC stimulation. For one third of the group, we placed the cathode 
on the left anterior temporal lobe (to decrease the likelihood of neurons firing
in that area) and the anode on the right anterior temporal lobe (to boost the
chances of neuronal activity there). For another 20 participants, we switched
the cathode and the anode. The final third received sham stimulation.

Next the subjects had six minutes to
solve another problem. This task required 
a different kind of solution. As we
had expected, many people were stuck.
Yet 60 percent of those in the group that
received stimulation according to our 
parameters solved the problem. Only 20
percent of those in the placebo group
solved the new problem, and reversing
the direction of stimulation did not have
a significant effect on performance.

We did a follow-up study to ensure
that our results were not a fluke. This
time we used a notoriously difficult
task—the classic nine-dots problem. The
goal is to connect all nine dots with four
straight lines, drawn without lifting pen
from paper or retracing a line. A century
of research has established that in the lab
setting, at most 5 percent of participants
manage to crack it, and very likely fewer
manage to do so. Most people fail to 
decipher it even with hints and plenty of
time. The reason is that the problem activates 
seemingly relevant prior knowledge
that obstructs the solution. We tend to see
the dots as a square, with rigid boundaries. 

Solving the puzzle requires the examinee to do 
away with false constraints and view the problem in a new light.
Subjects were given three opportunities to solve the nine-dots problem: 
they tackled it for three minutes before brain stimulation, 
three minutes during stimulation and three minutes immediately 
after the current was turned off. None of our participants solved 
the problem before stimulation or in the sham condition.

"Yet 14 out of 33 individuals did so as a result
of receiving stimulation at the anterior temporal 
lobes according to our protocol. We calculated that the probability
that this fraction of people could solve it
by chance is less than one in a billion.

FURTHER READING

Many questions remain unanswered,
of course. The precise effects of tDCS inside the brain are not completely understood, so mechanisms other than the
ones we theorize might explain our results. The outcome of DC stimulation
also depends on various factors, including which hemisphere is dominant and
what the recipient’s mental state is. Furthermore, problems are often difficult in
multiple ways, and tDCS may only help
with overcoming one of the many bottlenecks. 
In addition to ironing out these issues, we are now 
testing whether we can induce the ability to formulate 
new questions—another critical component of genius. 


Questioning is exemplary of receptiveness to novelty and 
is often obstructed by our preconceptions.

We want to emphasize that our approach aims not to enhance an existing
ability but to reduce the limitations of
prior knowledge. This type of cognitive
enhancement is qualitatively different
from what scientists normally seek to
develop. Ultimately our goal is to develop 
a device that circumvents mental
blocks to creativity. Having at our disposal 
two approaches—the usual way of
thinking and the autistic focus on detail
could facilitate the ability to make
truly novel connections, which is the essence of creative genius. 