
Avoiding Collisions

2. In narrow waterways and canals, passing
a towboat can be especially difficult as
water—and occasionally small boats—is
pulled against the hull by the giant props.
Don’t pass until you can give the bigger
boat a lot of room.

3. When passing, use your VHF radio (Changel 13)
 to contact the towboat'’s operator
for instructions. Know the whistle signals.
These are much more likely to be given
over the VHF. The signals you are most
likely to hear on an inland river are one
or two short blasts. One whistle means
“I intend to leave you on my port side.”
Two whistles means “I intend to keep
you on my starboard side.” Three short
blasts means the vessel is backing. And—
an important one—four or more short
blasts means danger. The latter won't be
given on the VHF.

4. Engines break down, and any boat that
operates on a body of water with large
boats and a current needs a longer rode
than a boat that spends its time put-

putting around a shallow lake. Some
rivers can be surprisingly deep with
strong currents, especially in the early
spring and summer. Carrying at least 150
feet of rode with 10 feet of chain would
not be overkill.

Know the various configurations for navigation lights.
 The masthead, stern, and yellow towing lights are 
configured differently to indicate whether a tow is
being pushed or pulled; the towing distance; the 
size of the tug and/or barge;
and whether it's behind, ahead of, or
beside the tug. On the Mississippi, the
rules for lights are different on either side
of the Huey P. Long Bridge.

Avoid sharing locks with large towboats.
There have been many instances where
a smaller boat was shoved into the lock
walls by prop wash. If you're going to I
share a lock with a large towboat, talk
to the captain and lock operator before
selecting a spot, well away from the
props, to secure your boat.



Avoiding Big Ships

The Rules take into account the lack of maneuverability of large ships. 
You can’t expect to cruise down the middle of a shipping channel and 
get off lightly in court using some David and Goliath “I'm just a little boat” 
defense if there's a collision (and if you survive). Quite the contrary, Rule 9b 
is very specific: “A vessel of less than 20 meters [66 feet] in length or 
a sailing vessel shall not impede the passage