

far from being one in which madness was unleashed,
imposed upon the actors the most rigorous conventions,

When a boy, caught up in words that abruptly brought
him back to his anxiety, forgot that he was on a stage
and banged into the scenery in an attempt to escape,
shouting, “I’m scared, let me leave,” the adults echoed,
“Alice wants to leave. She’s scared. It’s dark” (M. Mannoni
1976, pp. 168-175). The child, astonished, replied, “I
want to leave. Armand wants to leave; Alice wants to leave}
I’m scared.” In a quite amazing way this boy, by expres:
ing distress that was heard and understood, managed to
put himself in the skin of the character he was playing,
Now it was from the place of Alice that he spoke of his
anxiety, anxiety that, suddenly, was not entirely his own.

He could play Alice within theatrical conventions, overs
coming his terror by displacing it onto the terror that 4
little girl, Alice, had experienced long ago in the past,
Bouquier and Richer (1976) emphasize the clinical
reality of what Freud says “when he proposes that it is to
the extent that the subjective drama is integrated into 4
myth having a widespread, even a universal, human valué
that the subject brings himself into being” (p. 170, citing
Lacan 1953-1954, p. 191). This boy, the authors add, “was
able to achieve a symbolization that, before, had been
impossible or absent.” He was able to transpose a threatening 
bit of the real into the imaginary of theatrical playing, 
and, at the same time, to disidentify from the part of
himself that was terrified—so much so that, one day, he
said to us, “I’m playing at being scary and at scaring my:

Birth of the Institution: Meeting Artaud and Grotowski

The opposite might have been the case in the kind
of playing in which the actor has to “stick to the script”
ind “sticks” to it so well that he remains, in his “real life,”
, prisoner of the role. In such cases, Octave Mannoni
(1969) tells us, the role “could not be confined to its
proper function, which was to show an imaginary character. 

We cannot tell whether the actor considered life
to be imaginary or the theater to be real” (p. 305).
Bouquier and Richer report that the adults were left
exhausted and drained by certain performances in which
they had to go back to the symptom while respecting
theatrical conventions. The play was put on in a theater
b fore a real audience, and, each time, the adults were
afraid that the performance might turn into a “happening” 
of madness. Bouquier and Richer mention another performance 
in the course of which Armand, forgetting that he was 
playing Alice, cried, “I want to go away!” “Silence,” answered 
the king, “or I'll clear the court.” “Oh, O.K.,” replied Armand, 
who once more took up his role in the play. The authors also 
mention scenes in which wordplay proliferated to the point where the
Audience wondered whether all the replies were intended
ow not.

Even if the theater involves an effect of illusion for
the audience, it offers the actor the potential for symbolization, 
thanks to a form of playing in which imaginary and real are not 
confused. A genuine theatrical work frees up the imagination, 
writes Artaud (1967). Like the plague, it makes the mask fall. 
This is not the decadent