

first hold to it with Swords and laws and wide and
complex combinations, The obscure Consciousness
of this fact is the light of all our day, the claim of
claims ; the plea for education, for justice, for char.
ity ; the foundation of friendship and love and of
the heroism and grandeur which belong to acts of
self-reliance. It is remarkable that involuntarily
we always read as superior beings, Universal hig.
tory, the poets, the romancers, do not in their stato.
liest pictures, — in the Sacerdotal, the imperial
palaces, in the triumphs of wil] or of genius, —
anywhere lose our far, anywhere make ys feel that
we intrude, that this is for better men; but rathoy
is it true that in their ovandest strokes we feel moat
at home. Al] that Shakspeare says, of the Kingy,
yonder slip of a boy that reads in the corner fools
to be true of himself. We sympathize in the great
Moments of history, in the reat discoveries, the
Steat resistances, the Sreat prosperities of men;—
because there law was enacted, the sea was searched,
the land was found, or the blow was struck, for Us,
a8 we ourselves in that place would have done op
applauded,

We have the same interest in condition and chan.
acter. We honor the rich because they have OXLOr
nally the freedom, power, and grace which we foal
to be proper to man, proper to us, So all that iw
said of the wise man by Stoic or Oriental pr moder
essayist, describes to each reader his own idea, 
describes his unattained but attainable. self. Alt lig.
erature writes the character of the wise man. Books,
monuments, pictures, con versation, are Portraits in
which he finds the lineaments he ig forming. The
silent and the eloquent praise him and aecost him,
and he ig stimulated wherever ho moves, as by perSonal allusions, 4 true aspirant therefore neyer
needs look for allusions personal and laudatory in
discourse, He hears the commendation, not of him immament,

These hints, dropped as it Were from sleep and
night, let us use in broad day. The Student is to
his own life the text, and books the commentary,
Thus compelled, the Muso of history will utter oracles, 
as never to those who do not respect them.
selves. I have no expectation that any man will
read history aright who thinks that what was done