

Zodlogists may deny that horse-hairs in the water
change to worms, but I find that whatever is old
corrupts, and the past turns to snakes. The reverence 
for the deeds of our ancestors is a treacherous
sentiment. Their merit was not to reverence the
old, but to honor the present moment; and we
falsely make them excuses of the very habit which
they hated and defied.

Another illusion is that there is not time enough
for our work. Yet we might reflect that though
many creatures eat from one dish, each, according
to its constitution, assimilates from the elements
what belongs to it, whether time, or space, or light,
or water, or food. A snake converts whatever prey
the meadow yields him into snake; a fox, into fox;
and Peter and John are working up all existence
into Peter and John. <A poor Indian chief of the
Six Nations of New York made a wiser reply than
any philosopher, to some one complaining that he
had not enough time. “ Well,” said Red Jacket,
‘*T suppose you have all there is.”

A third illusion haunts us, that a long duration,
as a year, a decade, a century, is valuable. But
an old French sentence says, ‘‘ God works in moments,’ 
“ En peu @heure Dieu labeure.’ We
ask for long life, but *tis deep life, or grand moments, 
that signify. Let the measure of time be
spiritual, not mechanical. Life is unnecessarily
long. Moments of insight, of fine personal relation, 
a smile, a glance, — what ample borrowers of eternity 
they are! Life culminates and concentrates ; and Homer 
said, “The gods ever give to mortals their apportioned 
share of reason only on one day.”

I am of the opinion of the poet Wordsworth,
that “there is no real happiness in this life but in
intellect and virtue.” I am of the opinion of Pliny,
that.“ whilst we are musing on these things, we are
adding to the length of our lives.” I am of the
opinion of Glauco, who said, “The measure of life,
O Socrates, is, with the wise, the speaking and
hearing such discourses as yours.”

Me only can enrich me who can recommend to
me the space between sun and sun. ”T is the measuve of a man,—his apprehension of a day. For
we do not listen with the best regard to the verses
of aman who is only a poet, nor to his problems
if he is only an algebraist ; but if a man is at once
acquainted with the geometric foundations of things
and with their festal splendor, his poetry is exact
and his arithmetic musical, And him I reckon the
most learned scholar, not who can uncarth for me
the buried dynasties of Sesostris and Ptolemy, the
Sothiac era, the Olympiads and consulships, but
who can unfold the theory of this particular Weduesday. Can he uncover the ligaments concealed

“Tee.