

ences, that are yet of no visible value, and wl
we may keep for twice seven years before
shall be wanted. The best things are of seouls
growth. The instinct of classifying marks the
and healthy mind. Linneus projects his sy:
and lays out his twenty-four classes of plants,
fore yet he has found in Nature a single plant t
justify certain of his classes. His seventh class
has not one. In process of time, he finds with do.
light the little white Zrientalis, the only plant will
seven petals and sometimes seven stamens, whivh
constitutes a seventh elass in conformity with hin
system. The conchologist builds hiv eablnet whilw —
as yet he has few shells, Ho labels shelves for
classes, cells for specios ; all but petit ris
But every year fills some sane and
ing speed as he becomes I} /
old scholar finds keen delight i in verldyiags the tine
pressive anecdotes and citations he has mot with: i
miscellaneous reading and hearing, in all the you
of youth. We carry in memory important au
dotes, and have lost all clew to the auth
whom we had them. We havea herole sp

said it. We have an adleatealiia line wo
Horace, ever and anop resounding in our mh
ear, but have searched all probable and improh
books for it in vain. We consult the roading

OLD AGE. ~ : 811°

but, strangely enough, they who. know everything
know not this. But especially we have a certain
insulated ‘thought, which haunts us, but remains in-

sulated and barren, Well, there is nothing for all

this but patience and time. Time, yes, that is the
finder, the unweariable explorer, not subject to cas
ualties, omniscient ab last. The day comes when
the hidden author of our story is found ; when the
brave speech retnens straight to the hero who said
it; when the admirable verse finds the poct to
whom it belongs; and best of all, when the lonely
thought, which seemed so wise, yet half-wise, halfthought,
 because it cast no light abroad, is suddenly
matched in our mind by its twin, hy its sequence,
or next related analogy, which gives it instantly
radiating power, and justifies the superstitious instinet with which we have hoarded it. We remember our old Greek Professor at Cambridge,
an ancient bachelor, amid his folios, possessed by
this hope of completing a task, with nothing to
break his leisure after the three hours of his daily
classes, yet ever restlessly stroking his leg and assuring himself “he should retire from the University and read the authors.” In Goethe's Romance,
Makaria, the central figure for wisdom and influence, pleases herself with withdrawing into solitude to astronomy and epistolary correspondence.
Goethe himself carried this completion of studies