 SPIRITUAL LAWS.

No man ever stated his griefs as lightly as he might. 
Allow for exaggeration in the most patient and sorely ridden 
hack that ever was driven. For it is only the
finite that has wrought and suffered ; the infinite
lies stretched in smiling repose.

The intellectual life may be kept clean and
healthful if man will live the life of nature and not
import into his mind difficulties which are none of
his. Noman need be perplexed in his speculations.
Let him do and say what strictly belongs to him, and
though very ignorant of books, his nature shall not
yield him any intellectual obstructions and doubts.
Our young people are diseased with the theological
problems of original sin, origin of evil, predestination 
and the like. These never presented a practical difficulty 
to any man,— never darkened across
any man’s road who did not go out of his way to
seek them. These are the soul’s mumps and measles a
nd whooping-coughs, and those who have not
caught them cannot describe their health or prescribe the cure. 

A simple mind will not know these enemies. It is quite another 
thing that he should be able to give account of his faith and 
expound to another the theory of his self-union and
freedom. This requires rare gifts. Yet without
this self-knowledge there may be a sylvan strength
and integrity in that which he is. “A few strong
instincts and a few plain rules” suffice us. —


My will never gave the images in my mind the
rank they now take, ‘The regular course of studies,
the years of professional education
have not yielded me better facts than some idle
bool under the bench at the Latin School. What
wo do not call education is more precious than
that which we call so. We form no guess, at the
time of receiving a thought, of its comparative value.
And education often wastes its effort in attempts
to thwart and balk this natural magnetism, which
is sure to select what belongs to it.

In like manner our moral nature is vitiated by
any interference of our will. People represent 
virtue as a struggle, and take to themselves great airs
upon their attainments, and the question is everywhere 
vexed when a noble nature is commended,
whether the man is not better who strives with
temptation. But there is no merit in the matter.
Hither God is there or he is not there. We love
characters in proportion as they are impulsive and
spontaneous. The less a man thinks or knows
about his virtues the better we like him. 

Timoleon’s victories are the best victories, which ran and
flowed like Tlomer’s verses, Plutarch said. When
we see a soul whose acts are all regal, graceful and
pleasant as roses, we must thank God that such
things can be and are, and not turn sourly on the
angel and say ‘Crump is a better man with his
grunting resistance to all his native devils.’