
The concepts of “general” and “situational” may be
applied to aggressive behavior in a fashion similar to
our discussion of non-assertiveness. The generally aggressive 
individual is characterized by behavior toward
others which is typically aggressive in every type of
situation. This person appears on the surface to have
a high level of self-confidence, to be in command of
every situation, to be strong and able to cope with life
on his/her own terms. The aggressive male may live
according to his image of the American cultural ideal:
the aggressive, masculine figure who dominates his 
environment and demonstrates his “manhood” by bravado.

Female aggressiveness is often intellectually oriented:
she may typically dominate conversations, belittle the
opinions of others, and leave no doubt that she considers 
herself the final word on nearly any topic.

One who is generally aggressive appears to have friction 
with the majority of people with whom she/he
comes into contact. She/he is extremely sensitive to
criticism and feels rejected a good portion of the time.
General aggressiveness is characterized by the ease with
which one is triggered into aggressive outbursts: in extreme 
cases, so volatile that the slightest threat to
security causes an adverse reaction, The male is often
very autocratic in his family relationships, with a submissive 
wife and cowering children, none of whom dare
cross him in any way. He may resort to physical punishment with 
the children and may be physically abusive
with his wife. The generally aggressive person of either
sex is often a loner, sullen and moody, who may have
great difficulty holding a job.

Because this behavior is so offensive to others, the
aggressive person may have few friends and little esteem
from his acquaintances, With a need for affection and
acceptance as great as anyone’s, she/he does not know
how to act assertively (and thus gain acceptance) or
how to ask for affection. Because of the abusive behavior, 
attempts at reaching out to others for human
contact usually end in frustration and further isolation.

Frank was a generally aggressive person who finally
sought help at 39 because his third wife had just threatened 
to leave him. He had grown up in a “tough” neighborhood, 
and learned early that_aggressive behavior _paid off among 
his peers. He was frequently afraid in encounters with other 
toughs in the community; however, he never let his fear show, 
hiding it behind a “bravado” style. As a young adult, he found
that some women admired his tough exterior and
seemed to enjoy the rough way he treated them. He
developed no really close friendships, and married first
at 19, After his 17-year-old wife got to know him in the
early weeks of the marriage, she ran home, and her
parents had the marriage annulled. Frank was hurt, but
remained “strong” on the outside. He began to drink
heavily and grew increasingly afraid of close relationships. 
He married again at 24, and managed to keep
that union going through six stormy years and the birth
of two children. It was his abusive behavior toward the
oldest child which led his second wife to divorce him.

Bouncing from job to job over the next several years,
at 36 Frank found a widow who broke through his
defenses and was genuinely supportive and caring. Her
patience with his aggressiveness led him to risk admitting 
to her some of his fears, and the relationship became quite solid. 
It was Frank’s drunken outburst after a party which resulted in 
her decision to leave unless he sought professional help. 
Frank’s therapy was intensive and complex, with assertion training—the process
of learning constructive self-expression—as only one of
several phases. His early learning, resulting in the er-