

The difference in the three approaches is obvious.
The first, representative of our “non-assertive” style, 1s
a self-demeaning posture, sure to reveal you to the
clerk as a pushover, destined to be denied your rightful
due because you appear to be an “easy mark.” In the
second (aggressive) case, you probably will get what
you're after (the refund), but almost certainly the clerk
will detest you and make the process as prolonged and
unpleasant as possible. Approach (3) will in all likelihood 
achieve your goal, and the clerk (and whomever
you may be with) will respect you for it.

The message here is that in many instances the nonverbal aspects 
of your behavior say more than do the words themselves. 
Although we don’t really believe the words are unimportant, 
they are most certainly less important than many people believe. 
The fact that you assert yourself is primary, the way you handle it is
next, and finally, what you say is of less importance.

In the past decade considerable research has been
done in the area of non-verbal dimensions of communication. 
We now have evidence to demonstrate the manner in which we 
utilize these components of behavior to establish territoriality,
dominance, relationship, emphasis, interest, caring, control, approval,
recognition.

Watch some people expressing themselves. One effective way to do this 
is to watch a dramatic production on television with the sound turned 
down so you can’t hear what is being said. Almost invariably you can
detect the mood and some of the message of the speakers by noting their 
eye contact, facial expression, gestures, posture, etc.

Eye Contact

Looking directly at another person to whom you are
speaking is an effective way of declaring that you are
sincere about what you are saying, and that it is directed 
to that person. Looking away Or looking down
suggests a lack of confidence in oneself or deference to
the other person. An aggressive Stare may be an attempt
to “overpower” the other. Continuous eye contact can
be uncomfortable, inappropriate, or even a “same,” but
r relaxed, steady gaze into the other’s eyes, punctuated
by occasional looking away, personalizes communication 
and emphasizes your interest in that person.

The conscious use of eye contact is relatively simple
to develop. Pay attention to your eye communication as
you converse with others. Try to increase your eye attention.
Don’t overdo it, but let the other person know
you are interested by looking at him/her, not at the
floor, walls, or out the window as you are talking and
listening.

Body Posture

The “weight” of your messages to others will be increased if 
you face the person, stand or sit appropriately close, lean 
toward him/her, and hold your head erect, We are continually 
amazed to observe the number of persons who maintain conversations
—usually briefly!—while their entire bodies are aimed away from each
other! For example, as two people sit beside each other,
on an airplane, on a couch, in a classroom, at dinner,
it is almost typical that each will face straight ahead for
nearly all of the time, turning only the head slightly toward the other. 
A sim of the shoulders, say 30°,
toward the other makes the conversation so much more