 “The rector had gone away for the day. .. .” The space
of the rector is “allotopic’’; still it exists somewhere in the world
of the story. The space of the third paragraph is concrete, firmly
within the schoolhouse: our imagined visual frame is now precisely 
that which would accommodate three men and a piano
(and no more).4

Verbal story-space then is what the reader is prompted to
create in imagination (to the extent that he does so), on the basis
of the characters’ perceptions and/or the narrator’s reports. The
two spaces may coincide, or the focus may shift back and forth
freely, as in this example from Madame Bovary:

One day he arrived about three o'clock. Everyone was in the fields,
He went into the kitchen, and at first didn’t see Emma. The shutters
were closed; the sun, streaming in between the slats, patterned the
floor with long thin stripes that broke off at the corners of the furniture
and quivered on the ceiling. On the table, flies were climbing up the
sides of glasses that had recently been used, and buzzing as they struggled
to keep from drowning in the cider at the bottom. The light coming down the 
chimney turned the soot on the fireback to velvet and
gave a bluish cast to the cold ashes. Between the window and the
hearth Emma sat sewing; her shoulders were bare, beaded with little
drops of sweat.

The first two sentences are ambiguous from the strict perceptual
point of view. Charles’s entrance is either seen from the outside,
the narrator’s vantage, or from the character’s (we share his
sense of arrival, we see the door and move into the room with
him). But in the third sentence story-space is clearly the narrator’s:
 “. at first [Charles] didn’t see Emma,” though
Emma was in the room. The next sentences, however, suggest
Charles’s perception. The order of presentation—the closed
shutters, beam of sunlight streaming through the slats, and so
on—records the temporal order in which they came into his

4. “Butor explains: just as every organization of time-spans within a 
narrative or a musical composition . . I can only exist by virtue of the suspension
of the habitual time of reading or listening, so all the spatial relations of 
characters or adventures narrated to me can only reach me through the intermediary
of a distance which I hold in relation to the place which surrounds me.” As
quoted by F. Van Rossum-Guyon, Critique du roman (Paris, 1970), p- 25n.
(original in “L’Espace du roman,” Répertoire II, 43).

vision. Completing its circuit back to the window, Charles’s
glance falls at last on Emma.

The reader does not go through such speculative gyrations
as he reads, but the logic of his acquisition of story-space must
be something like that. Certainly one of the values of scrutinizing
 cinematic narratives—where discourse-space is analogous—
is to make us conscious of how scenes change, characters get
from one spot to another, and so on. Verbal and cinematic
narratives share an agile fluidity in depicting space not available
to the traditional stage. In the classic stage-play a single set may
suffice for a scene, an act or even a whole play. Dialogue alone
will imply “other parts.” Further, the relation of the characters’
distance, angle of vision, and so on are relatively fixed. Even
when a character moves through the greatest distance that the
stage permits, say from extreme background right to extreme
foreground left, the audience cannot see much more of his person 
than if he had remained where he was. But in film we can
literally (and in novel, figuratively) see the very pores of a 
character’s face if the camera wishes to exhibit them.

The affinity between cinematic and verbal narrative has been
frequently noted. Indeed, ‘camera eye” is a comfortable metaphor 
in traditionalist literary criticism: “The omniscient eye
which surveys the scene in the first chapter of Bleak House is like
the lens of a film camera in its mobility. It may encompass a
large panoramic view or, within a sentence, it may swoop down
to a close scrutiny of some character or local detail.” 5 How precisely
 is this done in verbal narratives, where all the artist can
command are words? The answer must lie in the words themselves.
 The “survey” of Southern England on the first page of
Bleak House is achieved by nouns whose very sense implies
pervasiveness, expanse: “Fog everywhere . . . up the river...
down the river . . . on the Essex marshes . . . on the Kentish
heights,” “Gas looming through the fog in diverse places in the
streets,’”” ‘Mud in the streets, as if the waters had but newly
retired from the face of the earth.” These are “mass” nouns
(denoting that which exists in an extensive continuum). The

5. W. J. Harvey, Character and the Novel (Ithaca, N.Y., 1966), p. 95.