

the works of other writers they crib scenes we’ve seen before,
paraphrase dialogue we’ve heard before, disguise characters we’ve
met before, and pass them off as their own. They reheat literary
leftovers and serve up plates of boredom because, regardless of
their talents, they lack an in-depth understanding of their story’s
setting and all it contains. Knowledge of and insight into the world
of your story is fundamental to the achievement of originality and
excellence.

SETTING

A story's SETTING is four-dimensional—Period, Duration,
Location, Level of Conflict.

The first dimension of time is Period. Is the story set in the
 contemporary world? In history? A hypothetical future? Or is it that
rare fantasy, such as ANIMAL FARM or WATERSHIP DOWN, in
which location in time is unknowable and irrelevant?

PERIOD is a story’s place in time.

Duration is the second dimension of time. How much time
does the story span within the lives of your characters? Decades?
Years? Months? Days? Is it that rare work in which story time
equals screen time, such as MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, a two hour 
movie about a two-hour dinner?

Or rarer still, LAST YEAR AT MARIENBAD, a film that liquefies time 
into timelessness? It’s conceivable, through cross-cutting, overlap, 
repetition, and/or slow motion, for screen time to
surpass story time. Although no feature-length film has attempted
this, a few sequences have done it brilliantly—most famous of all,
the “Odessa Steps” sequence of THE BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN.
The actual assault by the Tsar’s army on the Odessa protesters
took no more than two or three minutes, the time needed for 
jackbooted feet to march down the steps from top to bottom.
Onscreen the terror expands to five times this length.


DURATION is a story’s length through time.
_ Location is the story’s physical dimension. What is the story’s
specific geography? In what town? On what streets? What build
 on those streets? What rooms inside those buildings? Up what
mOuntain? Across what desert? A voyage to what planet?

ALOCATION is a story’s place in space.
 Level of Conflict is the human dimension. A setting includes
Not only its physical and temporal domain, but social as well. This
dimension becomes vertical in this sense: At what Level of Conflict
Do you pitch your telling? No matter how externalized in institutions
internalized in individuals, the political, economic, ideological,
 and psychological forces of society shape events as much
period, landscape, or costume. Therefore, the cast of characters,
remaining its various levels of conflict, is part of a story’s setting.
— Does your story focus on the inner, even unconscious conflicts
higher and wider, on battles with institutions in society? Wider
ll, on struggles against forces of the environment? From the subconscious
 to the stars, through all the multilayered experiences of life,
story may be set at any one or any combination of these levels.

LEVEL OF CONFLICT is the story’s position on the 
hierarchy of human struggles.

Relationship Between Structure and Setting
setting sharply defines and confines its possibilities.
Although your setting is a fiction, not everything that comes to
mind may be allowed to happen in it. Within any world, no matter
w imaginary, only certain events are possible or probable.

If your drama is set among the gated estates of West L.A., we
n't see homeowners protesting social injustice by rioting in their
lined streets, although they might throw a thousand-dollar
 fund-raiser. If your setting is the housing projects of East
thin your characters? Or coming up a level, on personal conflicts? \—