

The music of story is conflict. As long as conflict engages our
Thoughts and emotions we travel through the hours unaware. 
Then suddenly the film’s over. We glance at our watches
waved. But when conflict disappears, so do we. The 
eye-pleasing photography or the aural pleasures of a
score may hold us briefly, but if conflict is kept on hold
far too long, our eyes leave the screen. And when our eyes leave 
the teen they take thought and emotion with them.

The Law of Conflict is more than an aesthetic principle; it is the
“Will of story. Story is metaphor for life, and to be alive is to be in
temingly perpetual conflict. As Jean-Paul Sartre expressed it, the
Fience of reality is scarcity, a universal and eternal lacking. There
i'l enough of anything in this world to go around. Not enough
Hood, not enough love, not enough justice, and never enough time
Time, as Heidegger observed, is the basic category of existence. We
live in its ever-shrinking shadow, and if we are to achieve anythin
i Our brief being that lets us die without feeling we’ve wasted i
line, we will have to go into heady conflict with the forces of
Marcity that deny our desires.

Writers who cannot grasp the truth of our transitory existence
Who have been mislead by the counterfeit comforts of the sioetane
world, who believe that life is easy once you know how to play the
Hine, give conflict a false inflection. Their scripts fail for one of
{Wo reasons: either a glut of meaningless and absurdly violent conmict, er a vacancy of meaningful and honestly expressed conflict.

'he former are exercises in turbo special effects, written by
those who follow textbook imperatives to create conflict, but
lweause they’re disinterested in or insensitive to the honest sis
piles of life, devise phony, overwrought excuses for mayhem ‘

The latter are tedious portraits written in reaction peciogt conIlict itself. These writers take the Pollyanna view that life would
trully be nice ... if it weren’t for conflict. Therefore, their films
iWoid it in favor of low-key depictions to suggest that if ss learned to
‘ommunicate a little better, be a little more charitable, respect the
ivironment, humanity could return to paradise. But if history has
light us anything, it’s that when toxic nightmare is finally cleaned

Act One, therefore they’re not going to get him what he wants in/
Two. The writer is recycling story and we’re treading water.

The only way to keep a film’s current flowing and rising
research—imagination, memory, fact. Generally, a feature-lenp
Archplot is designed around forty to sixty scenes that conspire iM
twelve to eighteen sequences that build into three or more acts Hh
top one another continuously to the end of the line. To create for
to sixty scenes and not repeat yourself, you need to invent hundred
After sketching this mountain of material, tunnel to find those fe
gems that will build sequences and acts into memorable ai
moving points of no return. For if you devise only the forty to si)
scenes needed to fill the 120 pages of a screenplay, your work
almost certain to be antiprogressive and repetitious.

The Law of Conflict

When the protagonist steps out of the Inciting Incident, he ente ;
world governed by the Law of Conflict. To wit: Nothing moves 0
ward in a story except through conflict.
Put another way, conflict is to storytelling what sound is ft
music. Both story and music are temporal arts, and the single mo
difficult task of the temporal artist is to hook our interest, hold ot)
uninterrupted concentration, then carry us through time without an
awareness of the passage of time.

In music, this effect is accomplished through sound. Instruments
or voices capture us and move us along, making time vanish
Suppose we were listening to a symphony and the orchestra had
suddenly fell silent. What would be the effect? First, confusion and
wonder why they’ve stopped, then very quickly we would hear 
imaginations the sound of a ticking clock. We would become acutely
aware of the passage of time, and because time is so subjective, if that
orchestra were silent for just three minutes, it would seem like