

onscreen before? When your script becomes a film and the camera
dollies toward a singles bar, the audience’s first reaction may be,
“Oh man, not another singles bar scene.” But then you take them
through the door, show them what really goes on in those meat
racks. If you’ve done your task well, jaws will drop and heads will
nod: “That’s right! It’s not ‘What’s your astrological sign? Read any
good books lately?’ That’s the embarrassment, danger. That’s the
truth.”

If your finished screenplay contains every scene you’ve ever
written, if you’ve never thrown an idea away, if your rewriting is
little more than tinkering with dialogue, your work will almost 
certainly fail. No matter our talent, we all know in the midnight of our
souls that 90 percent of what we do is less than our best. 

If, however, research inspires a pace of ten to one, even twenty to one, 
and if you then make brilliant choices to find that 10 percent of excellence 
and burn the rest, every scene will fascinate and the world
will sit in awe of your genius.

No one has to see your failures unless you add vanity to folly
and exhibit them. Genius consists not only of the power to create
expressive beats and scenes, but of the taste, judgment, and will to
weed out and destroy banalities, conceits, false notes, and lies.


Through tens of thousands of years of tales told at fireside, four
millennia of the written word, twenty-five hundred years of theatre,
4 century of film, and eight decades of broadcasting, countless 
generations of storytellers have spun story into an astonishing diversity
i! patterns. To make sense of this outpouring, various systems
Ive been devised to sort stories according to shared elements,
classifying them by genre. No two systems, however, have ever
agreed on which story elements to use in the sorting, and, therefore, 
no two agree on the number and kind of genres.

Aristotle gave us the first genres by dividing dramas according
\ the value-charge of their ending versus their story design. A
*lory, he noted, could end on either a positive or a negative charge.
Then each of these two types could be either a Simple design
(ending flat with no turning point or surprise) or a Complex design
(limaxing around a major reversal in the protagonist’s life). The
iesult is his four basic genres: Simple Tragic, Simple Fortunate,
(Complex Tragic, Complex Fortunate.

Over the centuries, however, the lucidity of Aristotle was lost as
jienire systems became more and more blurred and bloated. Goethe
listed seven types by subject matter—love, revenge, and so on.
‘hiller argued that there must be more but couldn’t name them.
Volli inventoried no less than three dozen different emotions from
Which he deduced “Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations,” but his categories