
every character you write. You wish to write for the cinema, th
foremost media of creative expression in the world today; you wish
to give us works of beauty and meaning that help shape our visiol
of reality; in return you would like to be acknowledged. It’s a no pI
ambition and a grand achievement to fulfill. And because you're
serious artist, you’re willing to risk vital aspects of your life to liv
that dream.

You’re willing to risk time. You know that even the most talented
writers—Oliver Stone, Lawrence Kasdan, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala
didn’t find success until they were in their thirties or forties, and jus
as it takes a decade or more to make a good doctor or teacher, it take
ten or more years of adult life to find something to say that tens 6
millions of people want to hear, and ten or more years and often ai
many screenplays written and unsold to master this demanding craft
You're willing to risk money. You know that if yaou were to take
the same hard work and creativity that goes into a decade of unsold
screenplays and apply it to a normal profession, you could 
before you see your first script on the screen.

You're willing to risk people. Each morning you go to your desk
and enter the imagined world of your characters. You dream and
write until the sun’s setting and your head’s throbbing. So you tum
off your word processor to be with the person you love. Except that
The protagonist’s first action has aroused forces of antagonism that
black his desire and spring open a gap between anticipation and
fell, disconfirming his notions of reality, putting him in greater
conflict with his world, at even greater risk. But the resilient
Kiinan mind quickly remakes reality into a larger pattern that
evorporates this disconfirmation, this unexpected reaction. Now
liv takes a second, more difficult and risk-taking action, an action
insistent with his revised vision of reality, an action Based on his
few expectations of the world. But again his action provokes forces


The writer places time, money, and people at risk because
ambition has life-defining force. What’s true for the writer is
for every character he creates:

The measure of the value of a character's desire is in
direct proportion to the risk he’s willing to take to
achieve it; the greater the value, the greater the risk.