
Pace begins in the screenplay. Cliché or not, we mane coma
rhythm and tempo. It needn’t be a symmetrical swelling of action
and shaving of scene lengths, but progressions must be shape
For if we don’t, the film editor will. And if to trim our sloppy work
he cuts some of our favorite moments, we have no one to blame
but ourselves. We’re screenwriters, not refugees.
Cinema is a unique art form. The screenwriter must master the
aesthetics of motion pictures and create a screenplay that prepares
the way for the artists who follow.

EXPRESSING PROGRESSION

When a story genuinely progresses it calls upon greater and greater
human capacity, demands greater and greater willpower, generate
greater and greater change in characters’ lives, and places them :
greater and greater jeopardy. How are we to express How ' At
the audience sense the progressions? There are four primary techniques.

SOCIAL PROGRESSION
Widen the impact of character actions into society.

Let your story begin intimately, involving only a few principal characters. B
ut as the telling moves forward, allow their actions ‘.
ramify outward into the world around them, touching and
changing the lives of more and more people. Not = at once,
Rather, spread the effect gradually through the progressions. 

LONE STAR: Two men searching for spent shells on a deserted
rifle range in Texas uncover the skeletal remains of a sheriff who 
vanished decades before. Evidence at the scene leads the current sheri
to suspect that his own father may have committed the murder. As he
investigates, the story spreads outward into society and back throws
time, tracing a pattern of corruption and injustice that hag touched
and changed the lives of three generations of Texan-, Mexican- and
African Americans —virtually every citizen in Rio County.


Imagine a story that begins like this: The President of the
United States gets up one morning to shave and as he stares in the
mirror, he hallucinates about imaginary enemies around the globe.
He tells no one, but soon his wife realizes he’s gone mad. His close
associates too. They gather and decide that since he has only six
months left in office, why spoil things now? They'll cover up for
lim. But we know he has “his finger on the button” and a madman
in this position could turn our troubled world into universal hell.

PERSONAL PROGRESSION

Drive actions deeply into the intimate relationships and
inner lives of the characters.

If the logic of your setting doesn’t allow you to go wide, then you
must go deep. Start with a personal or inner conflict that demands
balancing, yet seems relatively solvable. Then, as the work progresses, 
hammer the story downward—emotionally, 
psychologically, physically, morally—to the dark secrets, the unspoken truths
that hide behind a public mask.

ORDINARY PEOPLE is confined to the family, a friend, and
i doctor. From a tension between mother and son that seems
solvable with communication and love, it descends to grievous
pain. As the father slowly comes to realize he must choose
between the sanity of his son and the unity of his family, the
story drives the child to the brink of suicide, the mother to reveal