

Yes, as I understand it, since the distinction is precisely formulatable 
in terms of traits (Forster uses the words “idea” or
“quality” but they are clearly equivalent). And that in two respects: 
for one thing, a flat character is endowed with a single
trait—or very few: “There is Mrs. Micawber—she says she
won’t desert Mr. Micawber; she doesn’t, and there she is.’”’44
This does not mean that the flat character is not capable of great
vivacity or power, nor even that he need be “typed,” though
frequently he is (I presume by “typed” Forster means “easily
recognizable with reference to familiar types in the real or fictive
world”). Secondly, since there is only a single trait (or one
clearly dominating the others), the behavior of the flat character
is highly predictable. Round characters, on the contrary, possess a 
variety of traits, some of them conflicting or even contradictory; 
their behavior is not predictable—they are capable of
hanging, of surprising us, and so on. In structuralist vocabulary
 we could say that the paradigm of the flat character is directed 
or teleological, whereas that of the round is agglomerate.
The effect of the flat character is that it has a clear direction,
and so, as Forster remarks, is more distinctly (if not more easily)
remembered—there is simply less to remember, and that less is
very clearly structured. Round characters, on the other hand,
may inspire a stronger sense of intimacy, despite the fact that
they do not “add up.” We remember them as real people. They
seem strangely familiar. Like real-life friends and enemies it is
hard to describe what they are exactly like.

Saying that characters are capable of surprising us is another
way of saying that they are “open-ended.” We come to anticipate, 
indeed to demand, the possibilities of discovering new
and unsuspected traits. Thus, round characters function as open
constructs, susceptible of further insight. Our “readings out’
are not limited to the actual period of immediate contact with
the text. The character may haunt us for days or years as we try
to account for discrepancies or lacunae in terms of our changing
and growing insight into ourselves and our fellow pees. me cure?
great round characters seem virtually inexhaustible objects to be in
contemplation. We may even remember them as presences with
(or in) whom we have lived, rather than as separate objects.

The ineffability of round characters results in part from the
large range and diversity or even discrepancy among traits. But
other factors may contribute, too. The evidence for their traits
may be indeterminate in some way. For instance, the medium
may only hint at crucial data. Films are particularly versatile in
exhibiting the unspoken inner lives of characters laconically.
The jaded, apathetic, mysteriously troubled heroes and heroines
of Michelangelo Antonioni’s L’Avventura, La Notte, L’Eclisse,
[I Deserto Rosso, Blow-Up, are intriguing precisely because we
have no direct access to their minds. Their dialogue only hints,
tantalizingly, at the complexities below the skin.

Even where the medium does permit deep psychological
plunges, they may be expressly avoided by an opacifying discourse.
 Conrad’s Lord Jim is an obvious example: by making the
source for all information about Jim a narrator who continually
admits his inability to plumb Jim’s depths, to reconcile his inconsistencies, 
any ultimate tally is blocked. “Enigmatic,” in effect, 
becomes the last but most potent of Jim’s traits. Or, among
more modern narratives, the reticences of Hemingway and
Robbe-Grillet are obvious examples of “enrichments by silence.”

Where a character is open-ended, our speculation, of course,
is not limited to traits but also to possible future actions. It is
all very well to think that we leave Eveline in a kind of 
timebubble on the quay, or that it is Giuliana’s permanent fate in
Il Deserto Rosso to walk with her child under the polluted sky.
Indeed, Truffaut seems to have intended just such an effect in
freezing the last frame of The Four Hundred Blows, fixing the
young hero, Antoine, in permanent flight from authority. But
our minds do not necessarily accept the confines of the bubble.
We may understand that ‘‘fleeing authority” will characterize
much of Antoine’s future behavior, but we refuse to give up the
right to think about the specifics of that flight: more misunderstandings 
with relatives, friends, well-wishers, more trouble