

noted in Chapter 2, had originated this theory some eight years earlier.)
The organic chemist’s job was to discover, by experiment, the nature
and proportions of elements in a given compound, and then to describe
a carbon-string providing for just those elements, in just those
proportions. The description must be internally coherent (judged by
the rules governing atomic combination within molecules), and must
also fit the compound’s behaviour observed in the test-tube.

This job had been carried out successfully for ethyl alcohol, and for
many (‘aliphatic’) organic compounds like it. With respect to benzene,
however, it had not. Indeed, the contradictions involved suggested that
no such description could possibly be found.

The difficulty concerned the valency of carbon. Chemists had known
since 1852 that atoms have strictly limited powers of combination, or
valencies. In developing his string-theory in 1858, Kekulé had taken
carbon to have a valency of four, and hydrogen a valency of one. (This
is why the carbon atom in Kekulé’s diagram of Figure 2.1 is represented —
as being four times larger than the hydrogen atoms.)

A carbon atom in a string of carbon atoms uses up one unit of its
valency by being connected to another carbon atom, So it has three
units left over for combination with non-carbon atoms if it is at the end
of the string, and two if it is inside the string (accordingly, ethyl alcohol
is often represented as CH;CH,OH rather than C,H;OH).

Experimental evidence had shown that the benzene molecule was
made up of six carbon atoms and six hydrogen atoms. However, a
sixfold string of carbon atoms should have a total of fourteen hydrogen
atoms, not six.

The problem could not be solved by saying that some of the carbon
atoms within a benzene molecule are linked by double or triple bonds,
because this was inconsistent with the compound’s chemical properties. 
(If benzene contained redundant bonds, these should be able to
‘capture’ monovalent atoms like chlorine or fluorine; but the chlorine
atoms remained safely uncaptured.)

There seemed to be no way in which benzene could be given a
chemically intelligible molecular structure. Having wrestled with this
problem for many months, Kekulé then had the experience described
in Chapter 2:

I turned my chair to the fire and dozed. Again the atoms were gambolling
before my eyes. This time the smaller groups kept modestly im the background,

My mental eye, rendered more acute by repeated visions of this kind, could
now distinguish larger structures, of manifold conformation; long rows,
sometimes more closely fitted together; all twining and twisting in snakelike
motion. But look! What was that? One of the snakes had seized hold of its own
tail, and the form whirled mockingly before my eyes. As if by a flash of
lightning I awoke.?

It is not clear just what was going on here, even at the conscious level.
‘This is not (though it is sometimes reported as) a description of seeing
pictures in the fire, of interpreting flames as snakes. But was ita dream,
or a reverie? Did Kekulé see snakes, or merely shapes that reminded
him of snakes —or both? Did he see a snake biting its own tail, or merely
a snaky shape closing on itself— or, again, both?

As we shall see, it does not matter greatly which account we choose
(and his experience could just as well have been one of seeing pictures
in the fire), Whichever phenomenological description of the fleeting,
shifting images is correct, the closure of one of the ‘snakes’ was clearly the
significant feature.

But why? Would an image of a circular hoop, a familiar children’s
toy in Kekulé’s time, have been as fruitful? Would Kekulé’s insight
have happened even sooner if he had visualized sine-waves, which are
distinctly serpentine mathematical forms? A snake seizing its own tail is
admittedly surprising — but so what? Why was it so arresting that
Kekulé suddenly awoke?

As for the analogous ring-structure, contemporary chemistry
deemed it impossible. How, then, could Kekulé — aided by a tail-biting
snake — generate the idea of a ring-molecule? His remark that ‘This
time the smaller groups kept modestly in the background’ suggests that
he was specifically concerned with the carbon atoms, leaving the
hydrogen atoms to take care of themselves. But, faithful to the chemical
theories of the time, his vision initially depicted ‘long rows’ of atoms.
How could this string-vision give way to an image like a tail-biting
snake?

‘There are various ways in which the seminal snake-image could have
arisen in Kekulé’s mind. Much as a map suggests a number of
pathways by which to reach a given place, so a highly complex
computational system — such as a human mind — allows for many
differing routes by which to generate a certain structure, or idea.

For example, let us suppose two things: that the notion of an open curve
already existed in Kekulé’s mind, and that the ability to consider the
negative of various concepts was also available. Each of these suggestions 
is independently plausible, as the next two sections will show.