 PATTERNS OF ORGANIC ENERGY LIVING? 

So much slower, in fact, that it appears like to think that 
we are different from stones because we are
to the ordinary perception that they do not react at all. 
living and they are not, but there is no way we can prove our
“If this is so, then how can we say with certainty that rocks! 
position or disprove his. We cannot establish clearly that we
and even mountain ranges, do not react also as living organic 
are different from inorganic substances. That means that
 with a reaction time so slow that to catch it with logicically, 
we must admit that we may not be alive. Since this is
time-lapse photography would require millennia between I absurd, 
the only alternative is to admit that “inanimate” exposures! 
Of course, there is no way to prove this, but there objects may be living.
is no way of disproving it either. The distinction between The distinction between organic and inorganic is a concepliving and nonliving is not so easy to make.” actual prejudice. It becomes even harder to maintain as we
“That's clever,” we think, “but from a practical point of view, 5 élo > advance into quantum mechanies. Something is organic. ac-

it cannot be observed that inert matter responds to stimulae, cording to our definition > to processed _inforand there is no question that humans do.”

“Wrong again!” says de Wit, reading our thoughts. “Any
chemist can verify that most chemicals (which usually come

mation. The astounc ing discovery awaiting newcomers to
hi. M6 physics is that the evidence gathered in the development of
* quantum mechanics indicates that subatomic “particles
out of the ground as rocks) do react to stimulation. Under the constantly appear to be making decisions! More than that, the
right conditions, for example, sodium reacts to chlorine (by decisions they seem to make are based on decisions made
forming sodium chloride—salt), iron reacts to oxygen (by forming elsewhere. Subatomic particles seem to know instantaneously
iron oxides—rust), and so on, just as humans react to food what decisions are made elsewhere, and elsewhere can be as
when they are hungry and to affection when they are lonely.” far away as another galaxy! The key word is instantaneously. I
“Well, this is so,” we admit, “but it hardly seems fair to How can a subatomic particle over here know what decision
compare a chemical reaction to a human reaction. A chemical another particle over there has made at the same time the I
reaction either happens or it does not happen. There is nothing particle over there makes it? All the evidence belies the fact
in between. When two such chemicals are combined properly, that quantum particles are actually particles,
they react; if they are not properly combined, they do not A particle, as we mentally picture it (classically defined) is a q
react. Humans are much more complex. thing which is confined to a region in space. It is not spread ]
“If we offer food to a hungry person, he might eat it or he out. It is either here or it is there, but it cannot be both here I
might not, depending upon his circumstances: and if he eats, and there at the same time. }
he might eat his fill or he might not. Consider the person who A particle over here can communicate with a particle over I
is hungry and late for an appointment. If the appointment is there (by shouting at it, sending it a TV picture, waving, etc.),
important enough, he will go without eating, even though he but that takes time, even if only milliseconds. If the two parti- i
is hungry. If a person knows that his food is poisonous, he will cles are in different galaxies, it could take centuries. F or a i
not eat, even though he is hungry. It is a matter of processing particle here to know what is going on over there while it is i
information and r esponding appr opriately that distinguishes a happening, it must be over there. But if it is over there, it i
human reaction from a chemical reaction. Chemicals have no cannot be here. If it is both places at once, then it is no longer i
options; they always must act one way or the other.” a particle. i
“Of course,” beams Jim de Wit, “but how do we know that This means that “particles” may not be particles at all (page i
our responses are not as r igidly preprogrammed as those of a I 32). It also means that these apparent particles are related I

chemical, with the only difference being that our programs 5
are enormously more complex? We may not have any more t
freedom of action than stones do, although, unlike stones, we ]
deceive ourselves into thinking that we do!” H

with other particles in a dynamic and intimate way that coincides with our definition of organic. i)

Some biologists believe that a single plant cell carries within
it the capability to reproduce the entire plant. Similarly, the