
His act of onanism transcends narcissism, by transmitting thoughts 
and feelings to a consciousness outside his own.

Masturbation’s parallels with literary self-consciousness go beyond its
ability to transcend its apparent introversion. What stirs Bloom is not
Gerty’s actual charms but rather the illusion of such charms; and he, like
the reader of a self-conscious novel, is acutely aware that what has engaged 
his interest is not fact but fiction. When Bloom realizes, after all
the fireworks have “melted away dewily in the grey air” that Gerty
MacDowell is crippled, he reflects that he is “glad I didn’t know it when
she was on show” (U 300, 301). 

Eroticism itself, like the reading of fiction, requires the willing suspension of disbelief; 
and Bloom, with his“touch of the artist,” prizes the role of artifice accordingly: 
“Lingerie does it. [... ] Fashion part of their charm” Molly, with her comparatively
prosaic interest in “that tremendous big red brute of a thing he has” (U
611), Misses out on the tenderness of intimacy, and Blazes Boylan must
inevitably disappoint her: “[ .. . ] I didn’t like his slapping me behind
going away so familiarly in the hall though I laughed Im not a horse or
an ass am I[... ]” (U 610). Bloom, on the other hand, recognizes and
admits the object of his desire to be “A dream of wellfilled hose” (U 301)
(italics mine). Because his autoeroticism, like a self-conscious fiction,
thus acknowledges its dependence upon an illusion, its climax and 
dénouement are gratifying rather than self-abusive: “Did me good all the
same. [ .. . ] For this relief much thanks” (U 305). 

Bloom’s masturbation on a public beach, therefore, violates the dictates 
of propriety, succeeds in communicating thoughts and sentiments despite 
its apparent insularity, and acknowledges the role of illusion in achieving its ends. 
The stratagem whereby Dublin’s Odysseus spares the modesty of Nausicaa thus
serves as a triply appropriate metaphor for the literary self-consciousness
of Ulysses itself. f Sabiel weA re, Crnfortet ry

The theme of voluntary, or accepted, cuckoldry may similarly be
viewed, metaphorically, as a parable of the self-conscious artistic imagination. 
In Exiles, that problematic “problem play” (according to Hugh
Kenner, Dublin wits often claim to be “working on a dramatization of
Exiles”), the hero contrives to put his wife at the disposal of his best
friend while insuring his own ignorance of the results, in order to vivify

