

And yet what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to do with
Sybil Vane’s death? There was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not
killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him,
What was it, he wondered. He went towards the little pearl-coloured
octagonal stand, that had always looked to him like the work ol
some strange Egyptian bees who wrought in silver, and took the vol
ume up. “Le Secret de Raoul, par Catulle Sarrazin.”? What a curl
ous title! He flung himself into an armchair, and began to turn over
the leaves. After a few minutes, he became absorbed. It was the
strangest book he had ever read. It seemed to him that in exquisite
raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world
were passing in dumb-show before him. Things that he had dimly
dreamed of were suddenly made real to him. Things of which he
had never dreamed were gradually revealed.

It was a novel without a plot, and with only one character, being,
indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian,
who spent his life trying to realise in the nineteenth century all the
passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century eX
cept his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods:
through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their
mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called
virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call
sin. The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled
style, vivid and obscure at once, full of argot and of archaisms, of
technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes 
the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of
Décadents. 

There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids, andv as evil in colour. 
The life of the senses was described in the terms
of mystical philosophy. One hardly knew at times whether one was
eading the spiritual ecstasies of some medizeval saint or the morbid
onfessions of a modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy
odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the ~
brain. The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of
their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements
elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed
from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, 
that made him unconscious of the falling day and the creeping
shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky
yleamed through the windows. He read on by its wan light till he
could read no more. Then, after his valet had reminded him several 
times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and, going into the
next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always 
stood at his bedside, and began to dress for dinner. It was almost nine 
o’clock before he reached the Club, where he found Lord
Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very bored.

“I am so sorry, Harry,” he cried, “but really it is entirely your
fault. That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot what the
time was.”

“T thought you would like it,” replied his host, rising from his
chair.

“{ didn’t say I liked it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is a
great difference.”

“Kh, if you have discovered that, you have discovered a great
deal” murmured Lord Henry, with his curious smile. “Come, let us
yo in to dinner. It is dreadfully late, and I am afraid the champagne
will be too much iced.”