

The first thing to realize is that any entertainment experience is a series
of moments. Some are more powerful than others, and when we make these
we are generally charting the most powerful moments. Back in my Imagineer
days, when we would present a new idea for a theme park ride to the CEO of Disney
we eould expect one certain question: “What are the top ten moments in your expterience

This question takes a lot of thought and preparation to answer properly, b fl
we didn’t have a clear answer, the pitch meeting was over. When you chart a 
interest curve, you are figuring out how to best arrange the best moments of your
experieence, and you can’t do that if you don’t know what they are. That’s what makes
Lens of Moments so important. ,

At point (A), the guest comes into the experience with some level of interest;
atherwise, they probably wouldn’t be there. This initial interest comes from 
preconceived expectations about how entertaining the experience will be. Depending on
ihe type of experience, these expectations are influenced by the packaging, 
advertisements, advice from friends, etc. While we want this initial interest to be as high
48 possible to get guests in the door, overinflating it can actually make the overall
experience less interesting.

Then the experience starts. Quickly we come to point (B), sometimes called
“ihe hook.” This is something that really grabs you and gets you excited about the
experience. In a musical, it is the opening number. In the Beatles song Revolution,
\. videogame, it often takes the form of a little movie before the game starts. 

Having  good hook is very important. It gives the guest a hint of what is to come and pro

Of course, not every good entertainment experience follows this exact curve. But
iiost successful entertainment experiences will contain some of the elements that
ur picture of a good interest curve displays.

This diagram, on the other hand, shows an interest curve for a less successful
eijlertainment experience. There are lots of possibilities for bad interest curves, but
ihis one is particularly bad, although not as uncommon as one might hope.

 What are the key moments in my game?

Once you know your moments, how should you chart them out? The quality
an entertainment experience can be measured by the extent to which its unfoldil
sequence of events is able to hold a guest’s interest. I use the term “guest” instead
“player” because it is a term that works with games as well as more general experiences. 
The level of interest over the course of the experience can be plotted o {
an interest curve. 