
monies which they observed for this purpose were in substance
4 dramatic representation of the natural processes which they
Wished to facilitate; for it is a familiar tenet of magic that you
can produce any desired effect by merely imitating it. And as
they now explained the fluctuations of growth and decay, of
reproduction and dissolution, by the marriage, the death, and
the rebirth or revival of the gods, their religious or rather
magical dramas turned in great measure on these themes. They
set forth the fruitful union of the powers of fertility, the sad
death of one at least of the divine partners, and his joyful
resurrection. Thus a religious theory was blended with a
magical practice.

Of the changes which the seasons bring with them, the most
striking within the temperate zone are those which affect
vegetation. The influence of the seasons on animals, though
great, is not nearly so manifest. Hence it is natural that in the
magical dramas designed to dispel winter and bring back spring
the emphasis should be laid on vegetation, and that trees and
plants should figure in them more prominently than beasts and
birds. Yet the two sides of life, the vegetable and the animal,
were not dissociated in the minds of those who observed the
ceremonies. Indeed they commonly believed that the tie 
between the animal and the vegetable world was even closer than
it really is; hence they often combined the dramatic representation
of reviving plants with a real or a dramatic union of
the sexes for the purpose of furthering at the same time and by
the same act the multiplication of fruits, of animals, and of men.
To them the principle of life and fertility, whether animal or
vegetable, was one and indivisible. To live and to cause to live,
to eat food and to beget children, these were the primary wants
of men in the past; and they will be the primary wants of men
in the future so long as the world lasts. Other things may be
added to enrich and beautify human life, but unless these wants
are first satisfied, humanity itself must cease to exist. These two
things, therefore, food and children, were what men chiefly
sought to procure by the performance of magical rites for the
regulation of the seasons.

Nowhere, apparently, have these rites been more widely and
solemnly celebrated than in the lands which border the Eastern
‘Mediterranean. Under the names of Osiris, Tammuz, Adonis,

The principles of animal and of vegetable life
confused in these ceremonies.

Prevalence of these rites in
Western Asia and Egypt.