

anything that is tedious or distressing. At present machinery
competes against man. Under proper conditions machinery
will serve man.” There is no doubt at all that this is the future
of machinery, and just as trees grow while the country
gentleman is asleep, so while Humanity will be amusing
itself, or enjoying cultivated leisure—which, and not labour,
is the aim of man—or making beautiful things, or reading
beautiful things, or simply contemplating the world with
admiration and delight, machinery will be doing all the
necessary and unpleasant work. The fact is, that civilization
requires slaves. The Greeks were quite right there.* Unless
there are slaves to do the ugly, horrible, uninteresting work,
culture and contemplation become almost impossible.
Human slavery is wrong, insecure, and demoralizing.
On mechanical slavery, on the slavery of the machine,
the future of the world depends. And when scientific men
are no longer called upon to go down to a depressing East
End and distribute bad cocoa and worse blankets to starving
people, they will have delightful leisure in which to devise
wonderful and marvellous things for their own joy and the
joy of everyone else. There will be great storages of force
for every city, and for every house if required, and this force
man will convert into heat, light, or motion, according to
his needs. Is this Utopian? A map of the world that does
not include Utopia* is not worth even glancing at, for it
leaves out the one country at which Humanity is always
landing. And when Humanity lands there, it looks out, and,
seeing a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realization
of Utopias.

Now, I have said that the community by means of
organization of machinery will supply the useful things,
and that the beautiful things will be made by the individual.
This is not merely necessary, but it is the only possible
way by which we can get either the one or the other. An
individual who has to make things for the use of others,
and with reference to their wants and their wishes, does
not work with interest, and consequently cannot put into
his work what is best in him, Upon the other hand, whenever
a community or a powerful section of a community, or a
only real mode of Individualisitic government of any kind, 
attempts to dictate to the artist what he is to do,
 Art either entirely vanishes, or becomes stereotyped, 
or degenerates into a low and ignoble form
of craft. A work of art is the unique result of a unique
temperament. Its beauty comes from the fact that the author
is what he is. It has nothing to do with the fact that other
people want what they want." Indeed, the moment that an
artist takes notice of what other people want, and tries to
supply the demand, he ceases to be an artist, and becomes I
a dull or an amusing craftsman, an honest or a dishonest
tradesman. He has no further claim to be considered as an
artist. Art is the most intense mode of Individualism that
the world has known.” I am inclined to say that it is the
only real m ode of Ini at the world has known:
Crime, which, under certain conditions, may seem to have
(created Individualism, must take cognizance of other people
and interfere with them. It belongs to the sphere of action.
But alone, without any reference to his‘neighbours, without
any interference, the 2 artist can fashion a beautiful thing; and
if he does not doi solely for his own pleasure he is not an

And it is to be noted that it is the fact that Art is this
intense form of Individualism that makes the public try
to exercise over it an authority that is as immoral as it
is ridiculous, and as corrupting as it is contemptible. It is
not quite their fault. The public has always, and in every
age, been badly brought up. They are continually asking
Art to _be popular, to please their want of taste, to flatter
their absurd vanity, to tell them what they have been told
before, to show them what they ought to be tired of ‘Seeing,
to amuse them when they feel heavy after eating too much,
and to distract their thoughts when they are wearied of their
own stupidity. Now Art should never try to be popular. The
public should try to make itself artistic." There is a very wide
difference. If a man of science were told that the results of his
experiments, and the conclusions that he artived at, should
be of such a character that they would not upset the received
popular notions on the subject, or disturb popular prejudice,
or hurt the sensibilities of people who knew nothing about