

Over thirty years ago, a program was co-writing poems in the form of
Japanese haiku, a highly economical genre that constrains the poet as
much as possible.° The program contained a three-line frame, with
nine slots for which the human operator would choose words:

All [1] in the [2]
1 [3] [4] [5] in the [6]
[7] the [8] has [9]

Sometimes, the human operator was given a free choice: any word
could be chosen for any slot. But sometimes the program constrained
the choice.

The haiku-program contained a simple semantic net, built on the
principles of a thesaurus. The available words (about one hundred and
forty in all) were grouped into nine separate lists, each numbered for
the relevant slot. The list for slot-7 contained eleven words (including
Bang, Hush, Pfft, Whirr and Look), while the list for slot-5 contained
twenty-three words (such as Trees, Peaks, Streams, Specks, Stars, Pools and
Trails). A few words appeared on two different lists (thus White could fill ;
slot-1 and slot-4).

When choosing a word for slot-n, the human operator was forced to _
go to list-n. Moreover, each slot in the haiku-frame was semantically
connected (by one or more links) to another slot (or slots). The
semantically central word was slot-5, which was directly linked to five
others, and indirectly linked to the rest. The operator had to obey these
semantic constraints also, when choosing words from the lists.

‘This man-machine procedure produced the following two examples:

All green in the leaves
I smell dark pools in the trees
Crash the moon has fled

All white in the buds
I flash snow peaks in the spring
Bang the sun has fogged

For comparison, here are two haikus of the same form where the human
operator was allowed to choose words freely:

Eons deep in the ice
I paint all time in a whorl
Bang the sludge has cracked

Eons deep in the ice
I see gelled time in a whorl
Pflit the sludge has cracked

Unromantic Artists 159

Can you see a significant aesthetic difference? I cannot. I see no
evidence that the human’s creativity is diminished by having to follow
explicit semantic constraints, instead of implicit ones. (The operator
breaks a rule, to be sure, in omitting A/Z; but only seven of his freely
chosen words are foreign to the program’s list, and he seems to be
temporarily fixated on Eons deep in the ice.)

‘The reason for the apparent success of this very early program lies less
in the program itself than in its audience. In other words, readers of this
particular literary form are prepared to do considerable interpretative
work. The program’s gnomic poems are acceptable to us accordingly.
—th general, the more the audience is prepared to contribute in
responding to a work of art, the more chance there is that a computer's
performance (or, for that matter, a human artist’s) may be acknowledged 
as aesthetically valuable. We have already seen this process at
work with respect to abstract-AARON’s ‘landscapes’. The scare quotes 
are there because it is the viewer, not the program, who gives its
designs this interpretation. Much of the beauty, one might say, lies in
the eye of the beholder.

Certainly, the beholder is sometimes the program (or human artist)
itself, functioning in the self-reflective ‘evaluative’ mode. But the
audience may be prepared to supply meaning which the creator does
not — or even-cannot. (This fact is stressed in much recent literary
theory, wherein the text alone, not_the author's conscious or un- Fotnsuins!
conscious intentions, regarded as the proper focus of interpretation. 
The more economical the artistic style, the more interpretative work
the audience has to do. Hence poetry, especially poetry of a highly
minimalist type (such as haiku), is more tolerant of programmed
production than prose is. 

As an illustration of this point, consider the prose authored by a (very
early) program designed to write detective stories. Although this
system was a near-contemporary of the haiku-program, the aesthetic
value of its productions was very much less. Instead of seventeen-word
snippets, this program generated texts of over 2,000 words. Here are
two extracts from one of them:

‘The day was Monday. The pleasant weather was sunny. Lady Buxley was in a
park, James ran into Lady Buxley. James talked with Lady Buxley. Lady Buxley
flirted with James. James invited Lady Buxley. James liked Lady Buxley. Lady
Buxley liked James. Lady Buxley was with James in a hotel. Lady Buxley was
near James. James caressed Lady Buxley with passion. James was Lady Buxley’s
lover. Marion following them saw the affair. Marion was jealous.