

It should, furthermore, be understood that the main charade
of these anecdotes is only rarely symbolic, and then, usually
a rather secondary way, as when the dialogue contains allusions
which are obvious to both parties. But such commentators
Gernet (8) are, I feel, mistaken in supposing that the main pol
is the communication of some Buddhist principle by means of
symbol. The satori which so frequently follows these interchange
is by no means a mere comprehension of the answer to a riddle I
For whatever the Zen master says or does is a direct and 
spontaneous utterance of “suchness,” of his Buddha nature, and which
he gives is no symbol but the very thing. Zen communicatition
is always “direct pointing,” in line with the traditional four-phrase
summary of Zen:

Outside teaching; apart from tradition.

Not founded on words and letters.

Pointing directly to the human mind.

Seeing into one’s nature and attaining Buddhahood.**’

The successor to Hui-k’o is said to have been Seng-ts'a
(d. 606), and the story of their initial interview is of the sami
form as between Hui-k’o and Bodhidharma, except that wh :
Huiko asked for “peace of mind,” Seng-ts’an asked to
“cleansed of faults.” To him there is attributed a celebrated poert
called the Hsin-hsin Ming, the “Treatise on Faith in the Mind.”
If Seng-ts'an was indeed its author, this poem is the first clea
and comprehensive statement of Zen. Its Taoist flavor is apparent
in the opening lines,

And again,

Follow your nature and accord with the Tao;

Saunter along and stop worrying.

If your thoughts are tied you spoil what is genuine. . ++
Don’t be antagonistic to the world of the senses,

For when you are not antagonistic to it,

It turns out to be the same as complete Awakening.

The wise person does not strive (wu-wei);

The ignorant man 

If you work on your mind with your mind,

How can you avoid an immense confusion? +84

ixu-jan (spontaneity ), but its whole attitude is that of letting
ne’s mind alone and_trusting it to follow _its own nature-in
sontrast to the more typically Indian attitude of bringing it under
rigid control and shutting out the experience of the senses.

The Fourth Patriarch, following Seng-ts'an, is believed to have
heen Tao-hsin (579-651). When he came to Seng-ts'an he asked,
“What is the method of liberation?”

“Who binds you?” replied Seng-ts’an.

v “No one binds me.”

“Why then,” asked Seng-ts'an, “should you seek liberation?” 3° *
And this was Tao-hsin’s satori. The Chuan Teng Lu records a
{ascinating encounter between Tao-hsin and the sage Fa-yung,
who lived in a lonely temple on Mount Niu-t’ou, and was so
holy that the birds used to bring him offerings of flowers. As the
two men were talking, a wild animal roared close by, and
Tao-hsin jumped. Fa-yung commented, “I see it is still with you!”
-referring, of course, to the instinctive “passion” (klesa) of
fright. Shortly afterwards, while he was for a moment unobserved, Tao-hsin wrote the Chinese character for “Buddha” on
the rock where Fa-yung was accustomed to sit. When Fa-yung

The perfect Tao is without difficulty,
Save that it avoids picking and choosing.

16 In modern Chinese the first two characters mean something like “worldly”
or “outside the fold.” In the present context they are usually taken to mean
that the truth of Zen cannot be expressed in any form of doctrine, or hat
a teacher can do no more than show how to get it for oneself. However, the
marvelous ambiguity of Chinese might intentionally allow both meanings,
Consider the predominantly “secular” form of Zen expression, and such say*
ings as “Wash out your mouth every time you say, ‘Buddha!’ ” 1
i? Translations will be found in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, p. 182, and a revisilil
in Suzuki (6), p. 91. Another by Arthur Waley is in Conze (2) p. 295.
