
And alien tears will fill for him
Pity’s long-broken urn,
For his mourners will be outcast men,

And outcasts always mourn.

The Picture of Dorian Gray was published simultaneously in England
 and America in 1890 by the J. B. Lippincott Company of Philadelphia 
in the July issue of Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine, five years
before the series of sensational trials that would lead to Wilde’s 
incarceration. (The British edition of the magazine, copublished with
Ward, Lock, and Company, appeared with a table of contents slightly
different from that of the American edition.) Wilde soon set about
revising and enlarging the novel for a book edition, which was
published in 1891 by Ward, Lock, and Company. At the time of the
novel’s appearance in Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine, Wilde was
already well known to the general public—for his quick wit, 
theatricality, ostentatious dress, and the many poems, stories, lectures, and
journalistic pieces he had written over the previous decade. But The
Picture of Dorian Gray was the work that made him an iconic figure,
in the eyes of both his supporters and his detractors, and that would
later play a part in his downfall when it was used as evidence against
him in court. The novel altered the way Victorians saw and understood 
the world they inhabited, particularly with regard to sexuality
and masculinity. It heralded the end of a repressive “Victorianism,”
and, as Ellmann has remarked, after its publication “Victorian literature 
had a different look” (Ellmann, p. 314).

When the novel appeared in Lippincott’s, it was immediately
controversial. To be sure, appreciative and sensitive reviews 
appeared in Britain and America, but a significant segment of 
the British press reacted with outright hostility, condemning the novel as
“vulgar” “unclean,” “poisonous,” “discreditable,” and “a sham.” In
August 1890, Wilde claimed to have received 216 such attacks on his
novel since its appearance in Lippincott’s two months earlier.* “
Dulness and dirt are the chief features of Lippincott’s this month,” 
began the reviewer for the Daily Chronicle:

The element that is unclean, though undeniably amusing,
is furnished by Mr. Oscar Wilde’s story of The Picture of
Dorian Gray. It is a tale spawned from the leprous literature 
of the French decadents—a poisonous book, the atmosphere of 
which is heavy with the mephitic odours of moral
and spiritual putrefaction—a gloating study of the mental
and physical corruption of a fresh, fair and golden youth,
which might be fascinating but for its effeminate frivolity, 
its studied insincerity, its theatrical cynicism, its tawdry
mysticism, its flippant philosophizings. .. . Mr. Wilde says
the book has “a moral” The “moral,” so far as we can collect it,
is that man’s chief end is to develop his nature to the
fullest by “always searching for new sensations,” that when
I the soul gets sick the way to cure it is to deny the senses
nothing.

One of the most pernicious reviews came from the St. James’s
Gazette: “Not being curious in ordure, and not wishing to offend the
nostrils of decent persons, we do not propose to analyze The Picture 
of Dorian Gray,” writes the anonymous reviewer. “Whether
the Treasury or the Vigilance Society will think it worthwhile to
prosecute Mr. Oscar Wilde or Messrs. Ward, Lock & Co., we do not
know,” he continues. “The puzzle is that a young man of decent
parts, who enjoyed (when he was at Oxford) the opportunity of 
associating with gentlemen, should put his name (such as it is) to so
stupid and vulgar a piece of work.”* Another contemporary notice,
which appeared in the Scots Observer, a respectable, even presti-