We get all excited about them and have wonderful, memle experiences when playing them. 
But in the larger scheme of our lives, there is always something more important we 
could be doing. And, in fact, this is true for all entrtainment. It is no exaggeration 
to say that the goal of all entertainment experiences is to take something unimportant 
(such as a ball going through a hoop, a story of imaginary animals, or whether this card 
is a king or an ace) and make it seem important indeed. Is this deception? It is not. 

In the end, we are always aware it is “just a game.” But during play, something happens 
in us that makes it feel. it is SO much more. Something drives us and compels us to care 
about these trivial expriences as if they were matters of life and death. This is the magic of motivation,
question of why we do what we do is as old as philosophy itself, but there can be
pubt that game designers seem to have special insights into human motivation.
he reality of what game designers actually understand is somewhat murkier,
it is this murkiness that makes game design so challenging. In truth, most
ners create systems of motivation less through masterful understanding o
ntricacies of psychology and more through gut instinct and experimentation,
sionally stumbling into success. However, any insights about motivation ar
itially useful, and this is one of the rare areas where psychological research i
aligned with our design goals, so let’s start there.

43, psychologist Abraham Maslow wrote a paper titled “A Theory of Huma
ation,” which proposed a hierarchy of human needs. This is often presented as a
pyramid:

-- AND MORE NEEDS

and social belonging, they aren’t §0ing to pursue things that will boost their selfesteem. And if they don’t have good self-esteem, they will not be able to pursue
If you think hard, you can come up With some Possible exceptions to this model,

ovel + enough to be a very useful tool for discussing player’s
motivations in games. It is Interesting to think about different game activities and

but overall, it works well eno

where they fall on this hierarchy. Many game activities are abo

(you are trying to gather

lesources to build safe shelter), and it covers the top three levels by being a multiplayer game about mastery and creativity.

S you with other people lets you feel a sense of accomPlishment, and lets you build and create things that let you express yourself fulfills

Any game that connects you to
the needs on the third, fourth,
and fifth levels. Viewed from this perspective,
popularity and staying power of game
tfeation tools makes a lot of sense. It i
pil levels can feed into one another. B

An interesting as Maslow’s point of view is, more modern Psychologists have ta
ip hew points of view on the question of needs. Particular]

s with both online communities and content
s also interesting to consider how the differut there are other ways to think about needs.

(he work of Edward Deci and Richard Ryan, who have done a great deal to develop

they are saying is that just as humans have physical needs, we also have mental

we become mentally unhealthy.
Hecisely three mental needs:

Competence: I need to feel good at something.
Autonomy: I need freedom to do things my own Way.
Relatedness: I need to connect with other people.

‘feds—not just wants or desires, but actual needs. When these needs are unmet,
. Surprisingly, Ryan and Deci suggest that we h