

Primitive man had to see himself surrounded by a circle of
forces—demons, gods, friendly forces, impersonal forces. If I
think of a primitive walking through a forest, I expect his
 movement to be different from ours. If we pass through the woods on
an easy trail, we walk; if it’s not open, we bushwhack. But the
primitive may have stopped before a certain tree and bowed.
Before another, he may have lain prostrate, even abject, on the
ground; where there was familiarity with a relatively modest divine 
force, just a nod of the head as he passed by. That was no
more than was required unless the tree gave an indication that it
was annoyed. How did it speak? By many shades of distinction
in the rustling of its leaves.

If we accept these suppositions, then consciousness had to be
more intense for the primitive. He was always a protagonist. His
day was heroic or ghastly-For what does it mean to be a hero? It
requires you to be prepared to deal with forces larger than yourself.
Terrified and heroic, it is no wonder that the life span of
primitive man was shorter than ours.

By pagan times, of course, societies as developed as the Romans’ 
were ready to rely on rituals and special relation to their
gods. Earlier, among the Egyptians, amulets could even be the
equal in value of estate holdings. If you are trying to form and
maintain a society, you can't have people going off every moment to 
propitiate forces on their own. You do well to get them
believing there is a central force, society itself, which offers the
best approach to propitiation of the gods. Can one go so far as to
suggest that there is a buried element in many talented writers
that unconsciously expects their work to serve not only literature
 but as acts of conjuration or propitiation? What, when you
get down to it, was Joyce, as one mighty example, trying to show
us in Finnegans Wake?

The artist seeks to create a spell. Today, of course, the artist is no 
primitive man; he is all but completely insulated from the senses
primitive man once had. By now, the artist usually acts as a mediator
 between magic and technology. But no matter how technologized he becomes, 
his central impulse is to create a spell equivalent to the spell a primitive 
felt when he passed a great oak and knew something deeper than his normal 
comprehension was reaching him. Perhaps the primitive felt close to what
we feel when we see a great painting on a museum wall. We are
near then to something we can’t even call knowledge. It’s larger,
less definable, and certainly more resonant.

While the physicist is stirred, if uncomfortably, by feeling the
presence of magic in his experiment and the artist is often
drenched in statistical detail (since he has to deal with a world
that grows more and more technical and difficult to comprehend),
 at bottom their interests are opposed. Finally, the physicist is 
trying to destroy the fundament of magic, and the artist is
trying to undermine the base of technology. The artist believes
(and this is the greatest generalization I can make) that all cosmic 
achievement is attainable within the human frame—that is,
if we lead lives witty enough and skillful enough, bold enough
and, finally, illumined enough, we can accomplish every communication 
and reach every vault within the cosmos that technology would attempt 
to take by force: telepathy rather than telephony.

An equation sign can also be seen as a statement of metaphor.
When you say: “y equals x to the 2"¢ power,” you are in effect 
establishing a metaphor. Or, the obverse: An artist in a gallery,
looking at a painting, says, “I see God in the yellow.” All right,
that can be stated mathematically. The yellow of this painting
is a function of God. Either way, artist or physicist is trying to
penetrate into the substance of things. In that sense, the physicist 
and the artist are closer to one another than the artist and
the gallery owner, or the physicist and the engineer.

I’ve long had the notion that when highly charged people have
a confrontation—Shakespearean characters, for example—
coincidences will occur. Indeed, if there is any order in the cosmos, 
it should not be so exceptional that this is so. If a general,
let us say, is getting ready for battle and there are gods and devils 
surrounding him, they are certainly involved in the outcome.
Whether the general wins or loses the contest on that day will
have an effect on the fortunes of these gods. So they’re going to
be paying attention, are they not? In turn, the general is going