

Netherlands, toward the end of the sixteenth century (definite contractual 
acceptance of subjection to the discipline as a central condition).

Thus, for example, in Baxter the distinction between “mortal”
and “venial” sin reappears—quite in the Catholic manner. The former
is a sign of the absence or loss of a state of grace, and only a 
“conversion” of the whole man can guarantee its restoration. The latter 
is not incompatible with a state of grace.

Thus—as we shall discuss later—in numerous passages of Baxter’s 
Christian Directory and in the final section.

However, here a distinction needs to be made between Calvin’s 
theology and Calvinism, and between the theological
system and the needs of pastoral care. Al religious movements which
reached the broad mass began with the question “How can I be certain 
of my salvation?”

It cannot, however, be denied that the full development of this
concept only took place in the Jate Lutheran period. (It is also present
in Johannes Gerhard in precisely the sense here discussed). In the
fourth book of his Geschichte des Pietismus (vol. 2, pp. 3f.), therefore,
Ritschl sees the introduction of this concept into Lutheran religiosity

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC 141

i§ a revival, or adoption, of Catholic piety. He does not dispute
p. 10) that the problem of individual assurance of salvation was the
e for both Luther and the Catholic mystics, but he believes that
the solutions they found were precisely opposite to each other. I am
NNO position to pass any judgment on the matter. Of course, anyone
an see that the atmosphere of Von der Freiheit eines Christenmenn 
is different from that of the sentimental dalliance with “dear lit-
» Jesus” in later literature, or from Tauler’s religious mood.

And similarly the clinging to the mystical and magical element in the
Lutheran doctrine of the Lord’s Supper certainly has different religious 
motives from the “Bernardine” piety—the “Song of Solomon”
osphere—that Ritschl identifies again and again as the source of
cultivation of the “bride of Christ” idea. But could it not still be
the case that the doctrine of the Lord’s Supper was partially responsible 
for the revival of the mystical religion of emotion? It is by no
Ns true to say that (op. cit., p. 11) the liberty of the mystic coned per 
se in withdrawal from the world. In writings that are very
interesting for the psychology of religion, Tauler in particular speaks
of the practical effect of those nocturnal periods of contemplation
that he recommends especially for those times when one cannot
leep. The effect was, he said, to bring order into one’s thoughts 
coning work in the secular calling [Berufsarbeit]:

Only in this way (by the mystical union with God in the night
before falling asleep) is the mind purified and the brain strengthened
ind all day long man is disposed in a more peaceful and godly
tate from the inward exercise of being truly united with God.
he his. work e ordered. And so when man has been
thoughts to virtwe, then the works will be virtuous and godly”
(Predigten, folio 318).

It is evident that mystical contemplation and rational asceticism in the
willing are not mutually exclusive. They can only be so where religiosity 
assumes an obviously hysterical character, which was not the
tase for the mystics or even for all the Pietists.

At this point Calvinism and Catholicism meet. But for Catholics
he consequence is the necessity of the sacrament of penance, while