
THE PROBLEM'

a second playing (in an attempt to manage a combinatorial explosion), which
will look pretty bad under Lens #4, Surprise. Some games have tried novel
approaches to deal with this problem. The infamous game Psychic Detective
(once summed up in a review as “One of the worst games ever made. Also, a
masterpiece”) was a continuously moving 30-minute experience that always
culminated in a final psychic battle with the villain, in which your powers were
determined by the path you took through the game. As a result, to master the
game, you had to play it through over and over again. Since most of the game
consists of video clips, and the game tree has some significant bottlenecks that
you must experience every time, the designers filmed multiple versions of the
bottleneck areas, each with different dialog but containing the same
information. As hard as the designers worked to solve the problem of repeated content
(and many other problems), players generally found the process of replaying the
interactive story somewhat tedious.

There are exceptions, of course. Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic featured
novel type of player choice—did they want to play the game on the “light
vide” or “dark side” of the force, that is, with good or evil goals? Depending on
which of the paths you choose, you have different adventures, different quests,
and ultimately a different ending. It can be argued that this isn’t really a case
of two different endings on the same story, but two completely different states
so different that they are each equally valid. Players who try to take the
middle path (the, uh, beige side of the force?) generally find the experience to be
dissatisfactory.

Problem #4: Not Enough Verbs F

The things that videogame characters spend their time doing are very different
than the things that characters in movies and books spend their time doing:

Videogame verbs: run, shoot, jump, climb, throw, cast, punch, fly

Movie verbs: talk, ask, negotiate, convince, argue, shout, plead, complain

Videogame characters are severely limited in their ability to do anything that
requires something to happen above the neck. Most of what happens in stories 1s
communication, and at the present time, videogames just can’t support that, Ga
designer Chris Swain has suggested that when technology advances to the p
that players can have an intelligent, spoken conversation with computer-control
ame characters, it will have an effect similar to the introduction of talking pie
tures. Suddenly, a medium that was mostly considered an amusing novelly will
(quickly become the dominant form of cultural storytelling. Until then, however, (le
lack of usable verbs in videogames significantly hampers our ability to use pune
as a storytelling medium.