

He should be held morally responsible for his words just
as he is accountable for his other acts. Let us be orderly
and brief. Slovenly disorder in speech and writing is not
only a reflection upon a person’s thinking but an insult
to the person addressed. Anyone who is thinking clearly
and honestly can express his thoughts in words which
are understandable, and in very few of them.

For the purposes of subparagraph (1) of this par
graph, if a farmer-producer has a maximum price for
given class of sales or deliveries of a given variety
Kind of vegetable seed, but not for another class of s



As you see, a Reader's Digest “condensation” is an intricate
job of cutting and reassembling, done with great skill. The
net effect, in this particular case, is to cut the reading time by
(wo-thirds (which is a measurable advantage for people who
don’t have much time to spend on reading), but to leave the ©
feading effort needed just about where it was: Tested by our
yardstick formula, the original article (without the quotes)
rates STANDARD (3.3) and the short version the same (3.4). In
other words, this article already had the STANDARD readability 
that is the norm for the Reader’s Digest, so that there
was no gain in leaving out any difficult portions. On the contrary, 
what was left out was the personal touches and the
random flow of ideas that made the original so interesting and
readable. But that doesn’t mean, of course, that it should not
have been cut; after all, it gives you the gist of Mr. Maverick’s
ideas in a jiffy.

deliveries for which he has an established maximum
price hereunder; and the resultant figure shall be hi
maximum price for the class of sales and deliveries in
question.

What is it that brings on this long-winded, heartbreakinI
wordiness? I have a hunch that a writer, feeling defeat it
advance, gets lengthy and vague in self-defense. Then, if
defeat comes, he can ascribe it to the ignorance of t
people addressed.

: Somehow I get the idea that gobbledygook writing i
Just an attempt to impress the reader or the boss with
writer’s learning.

The American people are tired of double-talk and tall
they can’t understand. What are we going to do about it}
Well, memos should be short and to the point. If the
executive has to struggle through tiresome, wordy memo:
Fanda, they pile high on his desk, creating a Great Slow:
down Wall. We might start by applying the following rules:

1. Make it unpopular to use gobbledygook words.

2. Try to keep sentences under 20 words, certainh
under 25 words.

3. Don’t make a display of “book learning.”

EXERCISE
Study the two versions closely and compare them sentence
by sentence.

language must be rescued from the curse of confusion. 4
A man’s language is an important part of his conduet,