

novels present us with thousands of frozen moments
lined up one after the other. Reading a novel can often
be quite suspenseful, as our curiosity eagerly tries to
determine where each moment fits within the general
landscape, and how it may point toward the novel’s
center. Why is the writer at this particular moment
showing us the snowflakes seen from the window? Why
is he providing such detailed descriptions of the other
people in the train compartment? To be wondering
where exactly we are in the entire forest of moments, or
how we might find our way out of it—while simultaneously 
examining every tree, every detail, every narrative unit—
might make us feel suffocated, as if we’re
completely lost in the woods. 

But our attention is sustained by the fact that the trees 
in the forest, the manycthousands of indivisible moments 
that constitute thecstory, are made up of ordinary human details which
quite often are visual details. What keeps us attentive is
the way they appear to the protagonists—in other
words, the way they reveal the protagonists’ thoughts,
emotions, and character.

Looking at a large painting, we feel the thrill of being
in the presence of everything all at once, and we want
ve to enter the painting. When we are in the middle of a
big novel, we feel the dizzy pleasure of being in a world
which we cannot see in its entirety. To see everything,
we must continually transform the discrete moments of
the novel into pictures in our mind. It is this process of
transformation that makes the reading of a novel a
more collaborative, more personal task than gazing at a
painting.

In conjunction with my friend Andreas Huyssen, I
have been teaching a seminar at Columbia University.
The purpose of the course is to explore the relationship
between literary texts and painting, and to discuss, with
examples, how words mobilize our visual imagination.
The discussions inevitably touch on what the ancient
Greeks called ekphrasis. In its first and narrower meaning, 
ekphrasis is the description of visual artworks
(such as paintings and sculptures) through the medium
of poetry, for the benefit of those who cannot see them.
The paintings and sculptures in the poems can be real
or imaginary, just like details in novels. And that’s really
all you can say about this meaning of the word. The
best-known example of ekphrasis in classical literature
is the description of the shield of Achilles in Book 18 of
the Iliad. Homer gives such an extraordinary account
of the images forged into the shield by the god Hephaestos—
the stars, the sun, the cities, and the people
it depicts—that the description becomes a portrait of
an entire word-universe, a literary text much more im-
