
with me, in her opinion, had so intensified your vanity that
it had become the source of all your faults, and earnestly
begged me not to meet you abroad. I wrote to her at once,
in reply, and told her that I agreed entirely with every word
she had said. I added much more. I went as far as I could
possibly go. J told her that the origin of our friendship was
you in your undergraduate days at Oxford coming to beg
me to help you in very serious trouble of a very particular
character. I told her that your life had been continually in
the same manner troubled. The reason of your going to
Belgium you had placed to the fault of your companion
in that journey, and your mother had reproached me with
having introduced you to him. I replaced the fault on the
tight shoulders, on yours. I assured her at the end that I
had not the smallest intention of meeting you abroad, and
begged her to try to keep you there, either as an honorary
attaché,” if that were possible, or to learn modern languages,
if it were not; or for any ‘reason she chose, at least during
two or three years, and for your sake as well as for mine.
In the meantime you are writing to me by every post
from Egypt. I took not the smallest notice of any of your
communications. I read them, and tore them up. I had
quite settled to have no more to do with you. My mind
was made up, and I gladly devoted myself to the Art whose
progress I had allowed you to interrupt. At the end of three
months, your mother, with that unfortunate weakness of
will that characterises her, and that in the tragedy of my
life has been an element no less fatal than your father’s
violence, actually writes to me herself—I have no doubt, of
course, at your instigation—tells me that you are extremely
anxious to hear from me, and in order that I should have
no excuse for not communicating with you, sends me your
address in Athens, which, of course, I knew perfectly well.
I confess I was absolutely astounded at her letter. I could
not understand how, after what she had written to me in
December, and what I in answer had written to her, she
could in any way try to repair or to renew my unfortunate
friendship with you. I acknowledged her letter, of course,
and again urged her to try and get you connected with
some Embassy abroad," so as to prevent your returning to
England, but I did not write to you, or take any more notice
of your telegrams then I did before your mother had written
to me. Finally you actually telegraphed to my wife begging
her to use her influence with me to get me to write to you.
Our friendship had always been a source of distress to her:
not merely because she had never liked you personally, but
because she saw how your continual companionship altered
me, and not for the better: still, just as she had always been
most gracious and hospitable to you, so she could not bear
the idea of my being in any way unkind—for so it seemed
to her—to any of my friends. She thought, knew indeed,
that it was a thing alien to my character. At her request I
did communicate with you. I remember the wording of my
telegram quite well. I said that time healed every wound but
that for many months to come I would neither write to you
nor see you. You started without delay for Paris, sending
me passionate telegrams on the road to beg me to see you
once, at any rate. I declined. You arrived in Paris late on
a Saturday night, and found a brief letter from me waiting
for you at your hotel stating that I would not see you. Next
morning I received in Tite Street a telegram of some ten or
eleven pages in length from you. You stated in it that no
matter what you had done to me you could not believe
that I would absolutely decline to see you: you reminded
me that for the sake of seeing me even for one hour you
had travelled six days and nights across Europe without
stopping once on the way: you made what I must admit
was a most pathetic appeal, and ended with what seemed
to me a threat of suicide, and one not thinly veiled. You had
yourself often told me how many of your race there had
been who had stained their hands in their own blood; your
uncle certainly, your grandfather possibly; many others in
the mad, bad line from which you come.* Pity, my old
affection for you, regard for your mother to whom your
death under such dreadful circumstances would have been
a blow almost too great for her to bear, the horror of the
idea that so young a life, and one that amidst all its ugly
faults had still promise of beauty in it, should come to so