

Therefore our self is not lost in a larger whole,
submerges it in the life of a limited group. If the
participates in the power of being-itself it receives j
back, For the power of being acts through the power
the individual selves. It does not swallow them as ev
limited whole, every collectivism, and every conform
does. This is why the Church, which stands for the pow
of being-itself or for the God who transcends the God
the religions, claims to be the mediator of the courage I
be. A church which is based on the authority of the God
who a cannot make such a claim. It inescapably develops
into a collectivist or semicollectivist system itself.

But a church which raises itself in its message and its
devotion to the God above the God of theism without
sacrificing its concrete symbols can mediate a courage
which takes doubt and meaninglessness into itself. It is
the Church under the Cross which alone can do this, the
Church which preaches the Crucified who cried to God
who remained his God after the God of confidence had
left him in the darkness of doubt and meaninglessness. To
be as a part in such a church is to receive a courage to be
in which one cannot lose one’s self and in which one re
Ceives one’s world.

Absolute faith, or the state of being grasped by the
God beyond God, is not a state which appears beside
other states of the mind. It never is something separated
and definite, an event which could be isolated and described. 
It is always a movement in, with, and under other
states of the mind. It is the situation on the boundary of
man’s possibilities. It is this boundary. Therefore it is both
the courage of despair and the courage in and above every
courage. It is not a place where one can live, it is without
the safety of words and concepts, it is without a name,
a church, a cult, a theology. But it is moving in the depth
of all of them. It is the power of being, in which they 
participate and of which they are fragmentary expressions.

One can become aware of it in the anxiety of fate and
death when the traditional symbols, which enable men to
stand the vicissitudes of fate and the horror of death have
lost their power. When “providence” has become a superstition 
and “immortality” something imaginary that
which once was the power in these symbols can still be
present and create the courage to be in spite of the experience 
of a chaotic world and a finite existence. The Stoic
courage returns but not as the faith in universal reason.
It returns as the absolute faith which says Yes to being
without seeing anything concrete which could conquer
the nonbeing in fate and death.

And one can become aware of the God above the God
of theism in the anxiety of guilt and condemnation when
the traditional symbols that enable men to withstand the
anxiety of guilt and condemnation have lost their power.
When “divine judgment” is interpreted as a psychological 
complex and forgiveness as a remnant of the “fatherimage,” 
what once was the power in those symbols can
still be present and create the courage to be in spite of the
experience of an infinite gap between what we are and
what we ought to be. The Lutheran courage re-