

books of the nineteenth century. Yet Nietzsche had a bitter time getting
it into print; the first part was delayed because the publisher’s presses
were busy with an order for 500,000 hymn-books, and then by a stream of
anti-Semitic pamphlets;** and the publisher refused to print the last part
at all, as quite worthless from the point of view of shekels; so that the
author had to pay for its publication himself. Forty copies of the book
were sold; seven were given away; one acknowledged it; no one praised
it. Never was a man so much alone.

Zarathustra, aged thirty, comes down from his meditative mountain to
preach to the crowd, like his Persian prototype Zoroaster; but the crowd
turns from him to see a rope-walker perform. The rope-walker falls, and
dies. Zarathustra takes him upon his shoulders and carries him away;
“because thou hast made danger thy calling, therefore shall I bury thee
with my own hands.” “Live dangerously,” he preaches. “Erect your cities
beside Vesuvius. Send out your ships to unexplored seas. Live in a state
of war.”

And remember to disbelieve. Zarathustra, coming down from the
mountain, meets an old hermit who talks to him about God. But when
Zarathustra was alone, he spake thus with his heart: “Can it actually be
possible? This old saint in his forest hath not yet heard aught of God
being dead!’’#° But of course God was dead, all the Gods were dead.

For the old Gods came to an end long ago. And verily it was a good and
joyful end of Gods!

They did not die lingering in the twilight,—although that lie is told!*°
On the contrary, they once upon a time—laughed themselves unto death!

That came to pass when, by a God ea ees es
uttered, the word: “there is but one God! Thou shalt have no other gods
before me.”

An old grim beard of a God, a jealous one, forgot himself thus.

And then all Gods laughed and shook on their chairs and cried: 
“Is godliness not just that there are Gods, but no God?”

Whoever hath ears let him hear.

Thus spake Zarathustra.5+

What hilarious atheism! “Is not just this godliness, that there are no
gods?” “What could be created if there were Gods? . ... If there were
Gods, how could I bear to be no God? Consequently there are no Gods.”**
“Who is more ungodly than I, that I may enjoy his teachings?”** 
“I conjure you, my brethren, remain faithful to earth, and do not believe those
who speak unto you of superterrestrial hopes! Poisoners they are, whethar
they know it or not.”®4 Many an erstwhile rebel returns to this sweet
poison at last, as a necessary anesthesia for life. The “higher men” gather
in Zarathustra’s cave to prepare themselves to preach his doctrine; he
leaves them for a while, and returns to find them offering incense to a
donkey who has “created the world in his own image—i. e., as stupid as
possible.”®° This is not edifying; but then, says our text:

He who must be a creator in good and evil—verily, he must first be a destroyer, 
and break values into pieces.

Thus the highest evil is part of the highest goodness. But that is creative
goodness.

Let us speak thereon, ye wisest men, however bad it be. To be silent is
worse; all unuttered truths become poisonous.

And whatever will break on our truths, let it break! Many a house hath yet
to be built.

Thus spake Zarathustra.5¢

Is this irreverent? But Zarathustra complains that “nobody knoweth
any longer how to revere,”®? and he calls himself “the most-pious_of all
those who believe not in God.”** He longs for belief, and pities “all who,

é myself, suffer from the great loathing, for whom the old God died
and no new God yet lieth in cradles and napkins.”*® And then he pronounces 
the name of the new God:

Dead are all Gods; now we will that superman live... .

I teach you superman. Man is a something that shall be surpassed. What
have ye done to surpass him? .. .

What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what can be
loved in man is that he is a transition and a destruction.

I love those who do not know how to live except in perishing, for they are
those going beyond.

I love the great despisers because they are the great adorers, they are
arrows of longing for the other shore.

I love those who do not seek beyond the stars for a reason to perish and
be sacrificed, out who sacrifice themselves to earth in order that earth
may some day become superman’s. . . .

It is time for man to mark his goal. It is time for man to plant the germ
of his highest hope. . . .

Tell me, my brethren, if the goal be lacking to humanity, is not humanity
itself lacking? .. .

Love unto the most remote man is higher than love unto your neighbor.®

Nietzsche appears to foresee that every reader will think himself the
superman; and tries to guard against this by confessing that the superman
is not yet born; we can only be his fore-runners and his soil. “Will nothing
beyond your capacity. . . . Be not virtuous beyond your ability; and
demand nothing of yourselves contrary to probability.”** Not for us is
the happiness which only the superman will know; our best goal is work.
