
the station out there. She stopped while her husband opened the
door of a compartment, and they went in. They sat down side by
side, and she stared at the couple sitting side by side across from
them. —So much smoke, she whispered to her husband. He offered
her a cigarette. The train started. —And if we ever go all the way
to a town like that again, if you could call it a town, just to see a
church or whatever it was . . . I don’t see how you ate a bite of
that lunch. You'll regret it too, she added, trying to arrange her
feet round the wrapped legs stretched before her. The spike of her
heel caught the edge of the shawl, and she gasped. At that, the
man across from her appeared to recover some long-lost consciouses, a
nd he did so with a wild light in his eyes, darting down as
though he were going to grab the tall woman’s feet and pull her
off her cushion. But he very busily brought the ends of the shawl
pack where they’d been wrapped, and then, lighting a ferocious
looking yellow cigarette, started chattering to the hooded figure
beside him. —Dime lo, he said, —aunque no €s .. . dime que tu
“me quieres, aunque no €s .. . The tall woman cleared her throat,
drew her feet together carefully, managed a prim smile across the
way, and gripped her husband’s arm. —Let’s get out of here, she
whispered, —this . . . She stood, straining her smile, sustaining it
until her husband was up, fomenting it with embarrassment of
being polite, whispering, as the door slid open, —And my God! . . .
did you see her face? —Syphilis, her husband said, —they’ve got a
lot of syphilis here, even in the children, it’s inherited . . . as he
closed the door, and Mr. Yak, coming down the corridor behind
him, opened it and entered.
 _Who was that? he asked, seating himself, squaring his hair as
he did so.
—I told you, people . . . people will disdain no ruses, no ruse at
all to prove their own existence.
—Listen, you... But Mr. Yak found that he was again speaking to the
 back of a pair of shoulders, and he wilted back.
—Good God, the desolation of that place, that station we just
stopped at. The window again held off the black surface of the
night.
”J feel like we been riding on this thing all my life.
—Yes, yes that’s it, that’s it, you know? It’s like . . . like being
at sea. Somebody’s said that going to sea is the best substitute for
suicide. Why, in this country . . . in this country .. .
—Suicide? ...
—Look, what if we're caught?
—With this? Mr. Ydk shrugged. He had recovered his composure.