

Inrinsic vs. Extrinsic Motivation

Another way to think about motivation is by looking at where it comes from
is particularly relevant for game designers, since games use so many different
s of motivation to keep players interested. On the surface, it sounds simple;
n I feel like doing something, we say I am intrinsically motivated, but when
pone pays me to do something, we say I am extrinsically motivated. It may
id simple, but in the reality of games, things quickly become tangled. Do I play
Vian because I enjoy the visceral thrill of racing and chasing through the maze

WANNA VS. HAFTA

(intrinsic) or because the game gives me points (extrinsic)? What if I am truly
motivated by the excitement of getting a high score? Is that intrinsic, or extrinsic,
or both? Let’s say that PepsiCo creates a game where you get points and prizes for
drinking Mountain Dew. That’s clearly a system of extrinsic motivation. But what
il the game becomes a joke between my friends and I and we have an intrinsically
fun social experience one-upping each other by winning more points and prizes?
some are quick to vilify extrinsic motivation as being “cheap” game design, but
savvy designers know that one motivation can grow on another, like a vine growing on a trellis.

Some psychologists have tried to illustrate the complexity of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations by showing them as a continuum:

External

Intrinsic motivation

Because I feel like doing it for its own sake

Internal Intrinsic

The key idea is that “intrinsic” and “extrinsic” are not binary, but a gradient
where the more the motivation comes from “your true self,” the more internal it is.
As a game designer, it is important to have a sense of how internal or external the
(lifferent motivations in your game really are, for all motivations are not created
equal, and sometimes they can interact in unexpected ways. In one famous study,
(wo groups of children were asked to draw pictures. The first group was paid for
vach picture they created, the second group was not. If you believe the idea that
‘ore motivation is better, then you might expect that the paid group would draw
iiore pictures and better pictures. And you would be half right—they did draw
nore pictures, but the quality was lower—the pictures were not as interesting and
thoughtful. But here’s the surprising part: when drawing time was up, each group
Was asked to wait, while the researchers left the room. The unpaid children, with
crayons _and paper in front_of them naturally kept drawing. The paid children,
however, did not. They put their crayons down and just waited. It would seem
motivation is not purely additive; rather, the act of adding extrinsic motivation to
something that is already intrinsically motivating slides it along the continuum
loward the external, draining away the intrinsic motivation! This has serious
iepercussions for those who believe that any activity can be easily “gamified” by
adding simple points, badges, and rewards.

Wanna vs. Hafta

\n Chapter 4, “Game,” we talked about how a change in attitude can turn work into
play, and vice versa. This, without a doubt, is meaningfully connected to motivation.

Think back to the example of the factory worker who made a game of trying to beat

FIGURE
11.3

frac.)