

skimmed swiftly, frothing southward with no Cars or wind,
Odysseus shuddered one cold dawn, for in his mind
the swift thought flashed: this was no current or plain sea
but an unleashed mute whirlpool that now swirled toward death,
with roe-filled bellies and white scales flashed swiftly by
while birds plunged greedily and gulped shoal after shoal.
The suffering man strove to head off the perilous flood
but stopped with gaping mouth and let his rudder kick
on seeing a huge beast astride the fish cascade.

Its mouth glowed darkly in the light like a sea cave
in whose vast pit swift shoals of little fishes plunged,
From the beast’s nape a gushing spout of water sprang
in a rich gaudy rainbow scattering in the sun,
a water-mast on an exotic frigate’s deck,

When in the tumult at long last the roar was lost,
the lone man clasped the marvel in his inner sea,
happy that in this final hour, before his eyes
would shut forever, his mind had seen this fierce assault.
He shut his eyes and smiled, for recollections crossed
his memory’s dark ravines and drowned him in their flood:
the blind and silent river flowed of that ant-swarm
that once poured round his city like a swallowing death;
the blind moles who had sniffed the earthquake scurried past,
and stars fell which he dreamt one night had crawled like worms
and eaten all the last leaves of his sleeping heart.

‘The archer still with secret admiration mused
on his white head, that buzzing slanting wasp’s nest filled
With stings and honey, that gleaned fields and shores in flight.
“What is this life, what secret yearning governs it?
‘There was a time I called its lavish longing God,and talked 
and laughed and wept and battled by his side
and thought that he, too, laughed and wept and strove beside me,
but now I suddenly feel I’ve talked to my own shadow!

God is a labyrinthine quest deep in our heads;
weak slaves think he’s the isle of freedom, and moor close,
all the incompetent cross their oars, then cross their hands,
laugh wearily and say, ‘The Quest does not exist!’

But I know better in my heart, and rig my sails:
God is wide waterways that branch throughout man’s heart.”
Thus spoke the voyager’s untrammeled heart and mind
as the rough sea grew greener, wild with smothering mists,
and the North Wind grew sharper as with chilling breath
it blew and on the tiller froze the lone man’s hands,

Clouds dragged like sluggish smoke along the sea’s expanse,
drenched and corroded every bone and swelled each joint
till the soul huddled like a chattering, naked bird.

One dawn upon the waves he saw the first ice floes,
thick lumps of bobbing human heads that rose and sank,
that lightly tossed and touched his prow, then skimmed far off;
at the sky’s rim the sun now tose at drop of noon,
rolled through the mists, exhausted, then sank once again,
unable now to mount the earth like a fierce bull.

But one damp dusk the lone man gaped with startled eyes:
the sun had sunk, but a white-yellow banner spread
and softly fluttered in the sky with silver fringe;
slowly a tich-wrought fabric rolled, ribbons unwound,
rubies and emeralds glowed and pulsing sapphires streamed
till at its top a saffron tempest burst in gold.

As the god-treading athlete skimmed through the sky’s blaze,
myriad rainbows dangled from his crystal beard
and all his glittering coffin brimmed with precious stones;
when he spread out his hands, his fingers dripped with pearls.
It was as though the banner longed to seize the sky,
