

But in the novel, every reader is his producer. It does not mean, however, 
that novels should or must be aimless. Nor does it mean that failures in 
communication between novelist and reader should be treated 
as if successful communication an accident of personality. When communication fails,
it “may sometimes be the fault of the artist,” but must be recognized rather as a failure 
of the two consciousnesses involved to establish a harmonious relationship. 

This happens often enough in life; there is no reason why we may not expect
happen sometimes in our relationship to certain novels.

Of the effects of such sincere presentation on weak minds, when
the courses of the characters are not exemplary and the rewards and
punishments ill adjusted to deserts, it is not our duty to consider
too closely. A novel which does mortal injury to a dozen imbeciles,
and has bracing results upon intellects of normal vigor, can justify
its existence; and probably a novel was never written by the purest:
minded author for which there could not be found some moral
invalid or other whom it was capable of harming.”

Robert Penn Warren uses this quotation in defense of the morality
of Hemingway’s A Farewell to Arms. For him, if the book has
“meaning,” if it deals “seriously with a moral and philosophical is
sue which, for better or worse, does exist in the modern world in
substantially the terms presented by Hemingway,” it is exonerated,
its harmful effect on the weak is irrelevant.

But does not this balancing of the number mortally injured
against the number “braced” imply a utilitarian counting of heal
that we cannot really accept as a defense of the morality of literature? 
What do we say of a work which is “bracing” to a very few,
perhaps only one, but harmful to many? More important, to show
that an author’s intentions are serious and that his subjects are vilil
or real says very little about his artistic success. To deal with a subject
 that is in some way important may be a necessary step toward
writing well, but it is certainly not sufficient. To defend the moral
intent of the author is in itself no more conclusive than to shaw
that he wanted to write a masterpiece. In this matter, curiously
enough, the “intentional fallacy” is committed by many critics whit
avoid it otherwise: if a novelist’s intentions are “serious” rather
than “commercial,” or if he has set out to reveal filth rather than 
celebrate nobility, many seem to feel that they should give his 
at least some credit, however slovenly its technique may be.

The moral question is really whether an author has an obligation
to write well in the sense of making his moral orderings clear,
if so, clear to whom. 