

The King of the Wood must sooner or later overtake the profligate
 who indulges ‘immoderately in the seductive habit of mentioning 
his own name.

However we may explain it, the fact is certain that many a
savage evinces the strongest reluctance to pronounce his own
name, while at the same time he makes no objection at all to
other people pronouncing it, and will even invite them to do so
for him in order to satisfy the curiosity of an inquisitive
stranger. Thus in some parts of Madagascar it is taboo for a
person to tell his own name, but a slave or attendant will answer
for him. The same curious inconsistency, as it may seem to us,
is recorded of some tribes of American Indians. Thus we are
told that ‘the name of an American Indian is a sacred thing, not
to be divulged by the owner himself without due consideration.
One may ask a warrior of any tribe to give his name, and the
question will be met with either a point-blank refusal or the
more diplomatic evasion that he cannot understand what is
wanted of him. The moment a friend approaches, the warrior
first interrogated will whisper what is wanted, and the friend
can tell the name, receiving a reciprocation of the courtesy from
the other.’ This general statement applies, for example, to the
Indian tribes of British Columbia, as to whom it is said that ‘one
of their strangest prejudices, which appears to pervade all tribes
alike, is a dislike to telling their names—thus you never get a
man’s right name from himself; but they will tell each other’s
names without hesitation’. In the whole of the East Indian 
Archipelago the etiquette is the same._As a general rule no one
will utter his own name. To enquire, ¥What is your name?’ is a
very indelicate question in native society. When in the course
of administrative or judicial business a native is asked his name, ~ ¢ A
instead of replying he will look at his comrade to indicate that
he is to answer for him, or he will say straight out, ‘Ask him.’
The superstition is current all over the East Indies without
exception, and it is found also among the Motu and Motumotu
tribes, the Papuans of Finsch Haven in North New Guinea, the
Nufoors of Dutch New Guinea, and the Melanesians of the
Bismarck Archipelago. Among many tribes of South Africa men
and women never mention their names if they can get any one
else to do it for them, but they do not absolutely refuse when
it cannot be avoided.

