
 The man who exulted under torture, who
hurled curses at God and at beauty, who hardened himself
in the harsh atmosphere of crime, now only wants to
marry someone “with a future.” The mage, the seer, the
convict who lived perpetually in the shadow of the penal
colony, the man-king on a godless earth, always carried
seventeen pounds of gold in a belt worn uncomfortably
round his stomach, which he complained gave him dysentery.

Is this the mythical hero, worshipped by so many
young men who, though they do not spit in the face of
the world, would die of shame at the mere idea of such
a belt? To maintain the myth, those decisive letters must
be ignored. It is easy to see why they have been so little
commented upon. They are a sacrilege, as truth sometimes
is. A great and praiseworthy poet, the greatest of his time,
a dazzling oracle—Rimbaud is all of these things. But he
is not the man-god, the burning inspiration, the monk
of poetry as he is often presented. The man only recaptured 
his greatness in the hospital bed in which, at the
hour of his painful end, even his mediocrity becomes
moving: “How unlucky I am, how very unlucky lam...
and I’ve money on me that I can’t even keep an eye on!”
The defiant cry of those last wretched moments: “No, 00,
now I rebel against death!” happily restores Rimbaud to
that part of common human experience which involuntarily coinci
to life again revives the rebellion of the times
against life were only expressions of despair
of death. It is at this point he more rejoins the tortured 
adolescent whom we SO admired. He recaptures his youth in
pain finally experienced by those who do not know h
to attain happiness. Only at this point does his passidl
and with it his truth, begin.
Moreover, Harrar was a but in the form of his final

It is only fair to note that the tone of these letters mij
be explained by the people to whom they are written. But
do not suggest that Rimbaud is making a great effort to lie, I
one word betrays on the brink of the abyss and with him reabdication. 
“And best of he Rimbaud of former times.


