(whether it one-shot or a campaign) also has to be 
 based on the strategy laid out in the
strategy statement, The idea has to commununicate
the proposition to the right audience, all in
consistent tone. This is not as easy as it soum
and is virtually impossible to do without
coherent, well-defined strategy to work fro)

Every strategy should have an element
distinction (small or large) from the comy
strategies, as should the subsequent concep
campaign.

Note: if you are still unclear about the difference betw ei
strategies and ideas, re-read the Flowers & Plants A\
and BUPA case studies in The Strategy chapter, Note I

some strategies are more closely linked to the campaign I
than others. I

Types of Strategies

Here are some common types of creative
in the broadest sense of the word (rather
example, a simple “strategy = proposition” se!
from which ideas can be created. Some of th "
ideas might be closely tied to a particular str
and some might not. Some ideas might cor
two or more strategic approaches, but, as ¢
communicating one proposition.

The strategies and ideas listed throughout
this chapter are meant to serve as a source of inspiration. 
For a topic that has rarely been
explored in such detail, I have tried to category
both lists to the best of my abilities. Neither
are definitive, and nor can they be.

Strategies and ideas can combine or overlap,
making it very difficult to say which is which,
What’s most important is that the final ad is a
combination of logical and creative thinking
that is relevant enough to persuade the target
consumer to buy the product.

“Before and After” Strategy
This common strategy is basically: “show life LA
without the product, show life with the product.
It’s a simple way to understand the product benefit.
The subsequent idea and execution that comes.
from this strategy is usually a negative visual
(without the product) followed by a positive one
(with the product). This is not to be confused
with the “negative to positive” strategy below.
Within this idea there could be other types of
ideas, like visual simile or visual metaphor. The
both of these (see overleaf),




This approach is similar to “before and after,”
except the “after” is simply the product name/logo
ind tagline (if applicable). In other words, the
consumer can figure out the “after” stage
themselves, without having to see it.

“After Only” Strategy

This is a simple demonstration of the benefit.
Or in other words, “life with the product.” A large
Majority of advertising ideas fall into this category,
whether explicitly, or more implicitly (see page
109, below).

“Advice” Strategy

‘This is a lateral, “we can help you” approach,
usually expressed through the benefit. From this,
various ideas can grow. For example, for an ad
campaign announcing Macy’s biggest sale, one
student devised a series of ads that provide tips
‘on how to “jump” the line (queue) of people.

Another student team devised a campaign for UHaul removal van hire. 
The word “haul” in the
name “U-Haul” sounded like hard work until the
team discovered various safety and time-saving
techniques used by professional movers (i.e., UHaul’s competition) 
on how to pack fragile items,
load a van efficiently, move a piano correctly, etc.
Add a perfect tagline—We’ll Help U-Haul—and
a great campaign was created,

The advice strategy creates a positive image in
the mind of the consumer. Note also how both of
the above examples turn a negative into a positive:
waiting in line won't be as long; moving house on
your own won't be as tough.

“Knowledge” Strategy

This is similar to the “advice” strategy. This
approach demonstrates how knowledgeable the
client is about either (a) their own product, (b) a
subject related to the product, or (c) the market in
which the product exists, including the consumers
themselves. For example, a vineyard could show
how much knowledge, skill, and care goes into
its wine making, or wine making in general, or
perhaps something related like food. These
demonstrations of knowledge communicate
to the consumer that this is a quality product
or service,