
Back in 1959, Ralph Ellison and I were out at the University
of Iowa on a literary symposium gotten together by Esquire.
We had a lively audience, and the show went on for several intense days. 
At the end, it seemed a little strange to me that we
had really worked that hard, gotten into so many discussions
with students and attendant academics, and even argued with
each other as lively as hell. When it was over, there was even a bit
of sadness. Something that had become Just a bit exceptional
was done. So I said to Ellison, “Why the hell do we do what we
did we work so hard?” He said, “Man, we’re expendable"
always liked that remark. , P ——_

One’s work is just that—expendable. If I
succeed in changing the cael of someone ws tame nat
gent than myself, fine. If you advance a thought as far as you can
and it’s overtaken and improved by someone on
the Opposite side, then in effect you have improved an 
adversary s mind. We can, however, feel the confidence that someone
will come along who will take your opponent’s improvement of
your idea and lift it higher on your side. Democracy is the 
throbbing embodiment of the dialectic—thesis, antithesis, 
and synthesis ready to become the new thesis. _

You cannot have a great democracy without great writers. If
great novels disappear, as they are in danger of doing, and our
storytelling is co-opted by television and journalism, then I
think we will be that much farther away from a free society. 
Novels that reinvigorate our view of the subtlety of moral judgments
are essential to a democracy. Americans were affected for decades 
by The Grapes of Wrath. Some good Southerners even developed 
a sense of the tragic by reading Faulkner.

I don’t like to say to myself, “I want to get this idea across.”
Rather, I try to arouse a state of consciousness in the reader that
will accommodate the material I am presenting. My hope is that
my work will change their minds. Be it understood! I don’t want
to change everybody’s mind in one direction—that’s equal to
propaganda. Rather than move all my readers ten degrees to
the left, I would be happier if I nudged some there while others
were swinging to the right. My fundamental belief about a good
society is that the cops get better and so do the crooks.

I feel that the final purpose of art is to intensify—even, 
if necessary, to exacerbate—the moral consciousness of people. 
In particular, I think the novel at its best is the most moral of the art
forms. You are exploring the interstices of human behavior—
which is the first approach to religious experience for many of
us, especially since the organized religions don’t begin to offer
sufficient account of the terrible complexities of moral experience 
and its dark sibling, moral ambiguity. The wisest rule
of thumb for the would-be moralist is: There are no answers.
There are only questions.


The logic of reincarnation, it seems to me, is that it may enable
God to go back to certain projects, just as an artist sometimes
wishes to improve his or her first attempt, work it further, go to
the point where he can do better, or, if not, know at least that he
has failed and can abandon a particular notion. Some human
souls may represent some of the more poignant notions of God.
You see, there’s an extraordinary beauty in the potential of most
human relations if we’re willing to assume that under all the 
absurdities, the spleen, the waste, the brutality, there was, indeed,
a blocked aesthetic conception.

Speaking at the MacDowell Colony once, I found myself saying,
“There is no reason to believe the novelist is not better equipped