The morning of the game fist fights broke out all over
the stands in Knights Field. Hats, bottles, apple cores, bananas,
“snd the mushy contents of sack lunches were thrown around.
A fan in one of the boxes had a rock bounced off his skull,
opening a bleeding gash. Two special cops rushed up the steps
and got hold of an innocent-looking guy with glasses, whose
pockets were stuffed with odd-shaped rocks. They dragged
him forth, although he was hollering he had collected them
for his rock garden, and flung him headlong out of the park.

He was from Pittsburgh and cursed the Knights into the
ground. A disappointed truck driver who couldn’t get in to
see the game tackled him from behind, knocking the rock
collector’s head against the sidewalk and smashing his glasses.
He spat out two bloody teeth and sat there sobbing till the
ambulance came.

The sun hid behind the clouds for the most part. The day
was chilly, football weather, but the stands were decorated
with colored bunting, the flags on the grandstand roof rode
high in the breeze and the crowd was raucous. The PA man
tried to calm them but they were packed together too tight to
be peaceful, for the Judge had sold hundreds of extra tickets
and the standees raced for any seat that was vacant for a
second. 

Besides, the Knights’ fans were jumpy, their nerves
ragged from following the ups and downs of the team. Some
glum-face gents bitterly cursed Roy out, calling him welsher,
fool, pig-horse for eating himself into that colossal bellyache.
But he had his defenders, who claimed the Big Man’s body
burned food so fast he needed every bit he ate. They blamed
the damage on ptomaine. The accusers wanted to know why
no one else at the party had come down sick. They were
answered where would the Knights be without Roy—at the
bottom of the heap. The one who spoke got a rap on the ear
for his trouble. The rapper was grabbed by a cop, run down
the catwalk, and pitched into the rotunda. Yet though the
fans were out of sorts and crabbing at each other, they presented. 
a solid front when it came to laying bets. Many pessimistically 
shook their heads, but they counted up the seven
straight wins over the Pirates, figured in that Hobbs was back,
and reached into their pockets. Although there were not too
many Pirate rooters around, the bets were quickly covered for
every hard-earned buck.

Otto Zipp was above all this. He sat like a small mountain
behind the rail in short left, reading the sports page of his
newspaper. He looked neither right nor left, and if somebody
tried to talk to him Otto gave him short shrift. Then when
they least expected it, he would honk his horn and cry out
in shrill tones, ‘Throw him to the hawks.” After that he went
back to the sports page. :

When the players began drifting into the clubhouse they were
surprised to see Roy there. He was wearing his uniform and
slowly polishing Wonderboy. The boys said hello and not
much more. Flores looked at his feet. Some of them were 
embarrassed that they hadn’t gone to see him in the hospital.
Secretly they were pleased he was here. Allie Stubbs even
began to kid around with Olson. Roy thought they would not
act so chipper if they knew he felt weak as piss and was
dreading the game. The Judge was absolutely crazy to pay
him thirty-five grand not to hit when he didn’t feel able to
even lift a stick. He hoped Pop would guess how shaky he
was and bench him. What a laugh that would be on the
Judge—serve the bastard right. But when Pop came in, he