
40 / The Rebel

It is then, however, that his thoughts are most profound. He rejects, 
with exceptional perspicacity for his
times, the presumptuous alliance of freedom with virtue.
Freedom, particularly when it is a prisoner’s dream, cannot endure
 limitations. It must sanction crime or it is no
longer freedom. On this essential point Sade never varies.
This man who never preached anything but contradictions
only achieves coherence—and of a most complete kind—
when he talks of capital punishment. An addict of refined
ways of execution, a theoretician of sexual crime, he was
never able to tolerate legal crime. “My imprisonment by
the State, with the guillotine under my very eyes, was far
more horrible to me than all the Bastilles imaginable.”
From this feeling of horror he drew the strength to be
moderate, publicly, during the Terror, and to intervene
generously on behalf of his mother-in-law, despite the fact
that she had had him imprisoned. A few years later Nodier
summed up, perhaps without knowing it, the position
obstinately defended by Sade: “To kill a man in a paroxysm 
of passion is understandable. To have him killed
by someone else after calm and serious meditation and
on the pretext of duty honorably discharged is incomprehensible.
 Here we find the germ of an idea which again
will be developed by Sade: he who kills must pay with
his own life. Sade is more moral, we see, than our contemporaries.

But his hatred for the death penalty is at first no
more than a hatred for men who are sufficiently convinced
of their own virtue to dare to inflict capital punishment,
when they themselves are criminals. You cannot simultaneously 
choose crime for yourself and punishment for
others. You must open the prison gates or give an 
impossible proof of your own innocence. From the moment
you accept murder, even if only once, you must allow it
universally. The criminal who acts according to nature
cannot, without betraying his office, range himself on the
side of the law. “One more effort if you want to be republicans”
 means: “Accept the freedom of crime, the
only reasonable attitude, and enter forever into a state of
insurrection as you enter into a state of grace.” Thus total
submission to evil leads to an appalling penitence, which
cannot fail to horrify the Republic of enlightenment and
of natural goodness. By a significant coincidence, the
manuscript of One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom
was burned during the first riot of the Republic, which
could hardly fail to denounce Sade’s heretical theories
of freedom and to throw so compromising a supporter into
prison once more. By so doing, it gave him the regrettable
opportunity of developing his rebellious logic still further.
The universal republic could be a dream for Sade, but
never a temptation. In politics his real position is cynicism.
In his Society of the Friends of Crime he declares himself
_ ostensibly in favor of the government and its laws, which
€ meanwhile has every intention of violating. It is the
ame impulse that makes the lowest form of criminal vote
Or conservative candidates. The plan that Sade had in
ind assures the benevolent neutrality of the authorities.
athe republic of crime cannot, for the moment at least,
_ be universal. It must pretend to obey the law. In a world
that knows no other rule than murder, beneath a criminal
heaven, and in the name of a criminal nature, however,
Sade, in reality, obeys no other law than that of inexhaust.
ible desire. But to desire without limit is the equivalent
of being desired without limit. License to destroy supposes
that you yourself can be destroyed. Therefore you must
st uggle and dominate. The law of this world is nothing
but the law of force; its driving force, the will to power.
The advocate of crime really only respects two kinds
# power: one, which he finds among his own class,
0 nded on the accident of birth, and the other by which,
hough sheer villainy, an underdog raises himself to the
vel of the libertines of noble birth whom Sade makes
is heroes. This powerful little group of initiates knows
it has all the rights. Anyone who doubts, even for a
second, these formidable privileges is immediately driven
from the flock, and once more becomes a victim. Thus
 aristocratic morality is created through which a
group of men and women manage to entrench themves above 
a caste of slaves because they possess the
f a strange knowledge. The only problem for them In Organizing themselves 
so as to be able to exerfully their rights which have the terrifying scope of
they cannot hope to dominate the entire universe