

the way we see unfolding, infinite depth. Painted and printed images
used to be just flat bands of color until the invention of perspectival 
construction and with it, the vanishing point—the void, nothing, the start 
of infinite possibility.» Moving toward a reality that isjust, collectively 
and for each of us individually, comes from a similar engagement 
with an inbuilt failure. A fuller vision comes from our ability 
to recognize the fallibility in our current and past forms of sight.

When I visited Douglass’s estate high on a hill in Anacostia, 
overlooking the Capitol building, I saw that his irregularly shaped study,
where he wrote speeches and correspondence, was angled to face
three things at once—glass-paneled bookshelves, a wall of pictures
and photographs, and a window with a view of pure expanse. There
are homes, and there are homes. Douglass’s residence in Anacostia
was a political act, not a retreat.** His study has a curious tripartite
vantage. It was off the parlor next to the main entrance without a division:
 there was no door. 

The arrangement of his study displayed his life lived with those powers—of 
oratory, of pictures, and through the window, a new imagined world. 
Behind his home, in view from his study, was a cabin—a windowless, 
one-room brick house, only ten by twelve feet—that he had built to 
replicate the slave cabin where he was born. Out on the house’s hilltop 
front lawn, he could face the arc of his own unprecedented rise—to the right, 
a green expanse of Maryland where he was born enslaved, and to the left,
Washington DC, where he became a man so prominent that a bill
Was introduced in the Senate for his body to lie in state in the Capitol upon his death.*”

He had no doubt, he said, that his topic would need further exploration. 
“The influence of pictures” upon our thoughts “may some
day, furnish a theme for those better able than I, to do it justice,” he
said.”* It has since become a timeless idea, articulated by national
leaders and sages in our age.

What we lose if we underestimate the power of an aesthetic act
is not solely talent and freedom of expression, but the avenue to see
up and out of failures that we didn’t even know we had. Aesthetic
force is not merely a reflection of a feeling, luxury, or respite from
life. The vision we conjure from the experience can serve as an 
indispensable way out from intractable paths.

What is the future of how we think about so-called failure,
these dubious starts and unlikely transformations? This was the apt
question that came from a friend, a photographer, as I was writing
this book. We can answer it by finding ways to honor them, by not
letting the path out of them stay hidden, by letting them be generative, 
even indispensable. Seeing the uncommon foundations of a
rise ingot merely a contrarian way of looking at the world. It has,
in many cases, been the only way that we have created the one in
which we are honored to live.