And if death bides its time it is but playing with us as a 
cat with a helpless mouse. “It is clear that as our walking 
is admittedly nothing but a constantly-prevented falling,
so the life of our bodies is nothing but a constantly-prevented 
dying, an ever-postponed death.”** 

“Among the magnificent orna ments and apparel
of Eastern despots there is always a costly 
vial of poison.”8? The philosophy of the East understands 
the omnipresence of death, and gives to its
students that calm aspect and dignified slowness 
of carriage, which comes of a consciousness of the brevity of
 personal existence. This is the beginning of philosophy, 
and the final cause of religion. 

The average man cannot reconcile himself to death; therefore he makes 
innumerable philosophies and theologies; the prevalence of a belief 
in immortality is a token of the awful fear of death.
Just as theology is a refuge from death, so insanity is for pain. 
“Madness comes as a way to avoid the memory of suffering” ** it
is a saving break in the thread of consciousness; we can survive certain
experiences or fears only by forgetting them.

In that resistance of the will to allowing what is contrary to it 
to come under the examination of the intellect lies the place at
which madness can break in upon the mind. . . . If the resistance of the
will against the apprehension of some knowledge reaches such a degree that
that operation is not performed in its entirety, then certain elements or
circumstances become for the intellect completely suppressed, because the
will cannot endure the sight of them; and then, for the sake of the necessary
connections, the gaps that thus arise are filled up at pleasure; thus madness
appears. For the intellect has given up its nature to please the will; the man
now imagines what does not exist. Yet the madness which has thus arisen
is the lethe of unendurable suffering; it was the last remedy of harassed
nature, i. e., of the will.

The final refuge is suicide. Here at I
imagination conquer instinct.
self by refusing to breathe;


SCHOPENHAUER 449

for the moment may chance to fall.”°° Misery and strife paciraein &
e death of the individual, and must continue, so long as set 7 i
nt in man. There can be no victory over the ills of life until the wi
been utterly subordinated to knowledge and intelligence.

VI. THE WISDOM OF LIFE
1. PHILOSOPHY

Consider, first, the absurdity of the desire for material agin zon
believe that if they can only achieve wealth, 269 wills ee ie ae
i i d to be a man with m
letely gratified; a man of means is suppose ns {
Ee fulfilment of every desire. “People are often reproached for eee
for money above all things, and for loving ese amps te! e i. :
it i inevi for people to love that which,
ut it is natural and even inevitable ‘ ‘ I
: unwearied Proteus, is always ready to turn itself into whatever obiect
their wandering wishes or their manifold desires ee very he
satisfy only one wish; money alone is-absolutely go : pn oe
cause it is the abstract satisfaction of every wish.”** ee et ze
devoted to the acquisition of wealth is useless unless we ae Ea i
turn it into joy; and this is an art that requires culture and wis ae
succession of sensual pursuits never satisfies for long; one cae er ‘
stand the ends of life as well as the art of acquiring means. “Men a
thousand times more intent on becoming rich than on acquiring = u ae
though it is quite certain that what a man 7s contributes more e i
ha fies than what he has.”®? “A man who has no mental needs is
called a Philistine” ;°* he does not know what to with = Peden
ilis in oti J h eedily from place to place for new
difficilis in otio quies;°* he searches greedily from place to place tr
ah and at last he is conquered by that nemesis of the idle rich 6
, 95
the reckless voluptuary—ennut. : :
Not wealth but wisdom is the Way. hal is a es Sepa
ivi i lies in the reproductive system) , : f
striving of will (whose focus C : ee
j ledge (of which the focus is
free, serene subject of pure know # sess
though born of the will, may y
Marvelous to say, knowledge, sah pie
i ibili independence of knowledge first app
the will. The possibility of the in f reas nee
i indi i ich the intellect occasionally respo
in the indifferent way in whic ; Riko Seri
i ire. i the intellect refuses to obey the 1 @ Bes
dictates of desire. “Sometimes 4 age
i i inds upon something, or when
when we try in vain to fix our min ee
t was entrusted to it. The ang
i on the memory for something tha : f I ¢
Be the ‘will against the intellect on such occasions makes its relation to it,

saad E "Essays, “Wisdom of Life,” p. 47.
» 515- ne
i 41.
eabid., p.-11. :
“P39. “Quiet in leisure is difficult. P22

“E 262.