
Use a dash when the word or word-group that
follows it constitutes a summation, an
amplification, or a reversal of what went before it.

Examples of sentences that need to be punctuated with a
dash:

1. Statistics 502, Mathematics 421, Computer Graphics 542, and
Economics 448, these are the courses that I regard as being
pertinent to the job for which I am applying.

rewrite:

Statistics 502, Mathematics 421, Computer Graphics 542, and
Economics 448—these are the courses that I regard as being
pertinent to the job for which I am applying. (a summation)

2. If he was criticized, he would become sullen and tight-lipped, a
reaction that did not endear him to his colleagues.
rewrite:

If he was criticized, he would become sullen and tight-lipped—
a reaction that did not endear him to his colleagues. (a commentary)

3. The basic material is constructed of composite synthetics, a
graphite fabric wrapped around a hollow rod made of nylon.

rewrite:

The basic material is constructed of composite synthetics—a
graphite fabric wrapped around a hollow rod made of nylon.
(an amplification) — 7
4. She kneads the ball of, clay, centers the clay on the potter’s
wheel, shapes the clay in the form of an urn, and then flattens
the urn with a wooden mallet.
rewrite:
She kneads the ball of clay, centers the clay on the potter’s
wheel, shapes the clay in the form of an urn—and then flattens 
the urn with a wooden mallet. (a reversal)


Unlike the colon (see 68), which directs the reader’s
attention forward, the dash usually directs the reader’s 
attention backward. at follows the dash, when it 1s use
a Tinking device, looks back to what preceded it for the
particulars or the details that spell out the meaning or
invest the meaning with pungency or irony.

The colon and the dash are usually not interchangeable
marks of punctuation. They signal a different relationship
between the word-groups that precede them and those that
follow them. After much practice in reading and writing,
one develops a sense for the subtle distinction in relationships 
signaled by the punctuation in the following sentences:

The reaction of the crowd signified only one thing: apathy.

The people clearly indicated their indifference to the
provocative speech—an apathy that later came back to haunt
them,

In the first sentence, the lead-in clause before the colon
clearly alerts the reader to expect a specification of what is
hinted at in that lead-in clause. In the second sentence,
there is no such alerting of the reader in the lead-in clause;
but following the dash, there is an unexpected commentary on 
what was said in the lead-in clause, a summary
commentary that forces the reader to look backward and
that receives a special emphasis by being set off with a dash.
The colon and the dash are both linking devices, but they
signal different kinds of thought relationships between the
parts of the sentence. Frequently, the signals a less
formal relationship than the colon does.