
labor in a calling is the ascetic means par
excellence [160]; he is every bit as convinced as the
 Puritans that it is God himself who blesses his own 
with success in their labors. And as
a substitute for the “double decree,” Pietism created ideas 
which, very much like that doctrine (though less strongly), 
established an aristocracy of the regenerate [161], with 
all the psychological consequences that we have already 
described for Calvinism, One of these is the doctrine 
known as “Terminism” [162], which was (falsely) attributed to
Pietism in general” by its opponents. This is the assumption 
that although grace is universally offered, it is only 
offered to any one individual once at one particular moment in his life, 
or at least on some occasion for the last time. [163] Anyon i is.

 Moment is beyond even the help of the universalism of race—that 
person is in the situation of someone who has been passed over by 
God in Calvinist doctrine. In effect, this theory is quite close to the assumption,
which Francke, for example, derived from personal experience and
which was widely believed within Pietism—indeed, it could even be
said to be predominant—that grace can only achieve a “breakthrough”
under specific unique and un-“repentance struggle” [Bufkampf] .* [164] 

Since, in the view of the scientists, not €véryone is disposed to have that experience,
 the person who, in spite of employing the ascetic method indicated by the Pietists
to help to bring it about, does not experience it, remains in the eyes of
1 i passive Christian. On the other hand, by the
Greation of a method for bringing about the “repentance struggle,”
the achievement of divine grace becomes in effect the object of
rational human arrangement.

This notion of the “aristocracy of grace” was also responsible for
fany Pietists (though not all, for instance, not Francke) and especially
, as the constantly recurring questions raised in Spener’s writing
low, many Pietist pastors, having reservations about private confessions.

These reservations contributed to the undermining of private
mfession in Lutheranism, too, since the effect of grace visible in a
y life, achieved through repentance, determined whether absolution 
could be granted. It was therefore impossible to be satisfied with
‘Mere “attritio” to justify granting it. [165]

endorf’s religious self-appraisal, even if it does waver in the face
ttacks by the orthodox, constantly leads to the notion of the “in-

repeatable circumstances, namely, after a 2