

Like Boss ‘Tweed, who, according to The Autobiography of Lincoln Stef
jens, distinguished between “dirty” graft and “clean” graft, Gaddis’s
novel distinguished between good and bad plagiarism. Uncomprehending, 
material greed motivates “bad” plagiarism (e.g., most counterfeiting Us
and social imposture), whereas “good” plagiarism is inspired by 
recognition of the subject’s abiding value 

Moses, one and all,” thinks Wyatt (p. 393). His own disciple Esme quotes
Wyatt, “—He even said once, that the saints were counterfeits of Christ,
and that Christ was a counterfeit of God” (p. 483). L He 5 he,

Given so much consideration of the value of art, it is inevitable that The
Recognitions should investigate the role of the critic. We have already
noted that criticism-of-the-novel-itself is a characteristic feature of 
selfconscious novels, and Gaddis’s work is no exception. Basil Valentine 
observes that “your friend [Willie] is writing for a rather small audience,
isn’t he” (pp. 372-73), just as Gide’s Laura criticizes Edouard’s plan for
“Les Faux-monnayeurs,” “Mon pauvre ami, vous ferez mourir d’ennut vos

lecteurs.

Gaddis’s portrait of most critics of art and literature is caustically satiric.
 The narrator’s attitude resembles that of Anselm, who says, “—I
keep myself busy sawing toilet seats in half for half-assed critics” (p. 134).

 The Recognitions self-consciously asserts its plans in Willie”’s defense
of “writing for a very small audience”:

In the most sharply satiric scene, two book reviewers discuss a book
which sounds suspiciously like The Recognitions:

—You reading that? both asked at once, withdrawing in surprise.

—No, I’m just reviewing it, said the taller one [ ... ], —all I need is the
jacket blurb to write the review.

It was in fact quite a thick book. A pattern of bold elegance, the lettering
on the dust wrapper stood forth in stark configurations of red and black to
intimate the origin of design. (For some crotchety reason there was no picture
of the author looking pensive sucking a pipe, sans géne with a cigarette, 
sangfroid with no necktie, plastered across the back.) (p. 936)

— Originality is a device that untalented people use to
 and protect themselves from those who are forced to devote all their time to plagiarizing.
 The curse of cleverness, (Pp. 252)

The critic’s work, as The Recognitions displays it, partakes of both good
and bad plagiarism. For surely in publishing explications of and commentaries 
on other people’s work, the critic effectively retails the ideas of they’re given no .
others for his own financial or professional profit. But at the same time,
