 FORMS OF TIME AND CHRONOTOPE IN THE NOVEL

upon folklore and antiquity—where the contiguity of ob =
more exactly corresponded to their various natures and »
itiposed COMERGS ty ant On ee were ¢
unknown. 

In prosecuting his negative task, the foremost device
Rabelaisian laughter—directly linked to the medieval genres
the clown, rogue and fool, whose roots go deep back into pre-civ
folklore. But Rabelaisian laughter not only destroys tradition:
connections and abolishes idealized strata; it also brings out =
crude, unmediated connections between things that people 
wise seek to keep separate, in pharisaical error.

The disunification of what had traditionally been linked,
the bringing-together of that which had traditionally been kept
distant and disunified, is achieved in Rabelais via the const
tion of series [rjady] of the most varied types, which are at tix
parallel to each other and at times intersect each other. With <=
help of these series, Rabelais can both put together and t
apart. The construction of series is a specific characteristic
Rabelais’ artistic method. 

All these widely varied series can be introduced 
to the following basic groups: (1) series of the human bod:
in its anatomical and physiological aspects; (2) human clothics
series; (3) food series; (4) drink and drunkenness series; (5) sexual
series (copulation); (6) death series; (7) defecation series. Each =
these seven series possesses its own specific logic, and each series
has its own dominants. All these series intersect one another:
by constructing and intersecting them, Rabelais is able to put
together or take apart anything he finds necessary. Almost 20
the themes in Rabelais’ broad and thematically rich novel are
brought about via these series.

We offer a series of examples. Throughout the entire novel
Rabelais presents the human body, all its parts and members,
its organs and functions, in their anatomical, physiological 2:
Naturphilosophie aspects alone. This idiosyncratic artistic pre
sentation of the human body is a very important element in the
Rabelaisian novel. It was important to demonstrate the whole r=
markable complexity and depth of the human body and its life, ==
uncover a new meaning, a new place for human corporeality i=
the real spatial-temporal world. In the process of accommodating
this concrete human corporeality, the entire remaining world also
takes on new meaning and concrete reality, a new materiality; =
enters into a contact with human beings that is no longer symbolic 
but material. Here the human body becomes a concrete