

stand and went on asking me questions, but I never called her a
fool, though it may have been her understanding that I considered 
her a fool, for she was very touchy.’ ® There is not much
left to be added to this portrait of the perennial Xanthippe.

Nine months after the wedding their first child was born, a
little boy, with his genitals so deformed that ‘their composition
looked like a boiled turtle in its shell’ 2 — which, Kepler explains,
 was due to turtles being his wife’s favourite dish. After
two months the child died of cerebral meningitis, and the next,
a little girl, died after a month of the same disease. Frau Barbara
bore three more children, of which one boy and one girl
survived.

Altogether, their marriage lasted fourteen years; Barbara
died at the age of thirty-seven, with a distraught mind. The
marriage horoscope had shown a coelo calamitoso, and in 
predicting disaster Kepler’s horoscopes were nearly always right.

3. Limbering Up

When, in the spring of 1597, the Mysterium at last appeared
in print, the proud young author sent copies to all leading
scholars he could think of, including Galileo and Tycho de
Brahe. There existed as yet no scientific journals nor, happy
days, book reviewers; on the other hand, there was an intensive
exchange of letters among scholars and a luxuriant international
academic grapevine. By these means the unknown young man’s
book created a certain stir; though not the earthquake which
its author expected, yet remarkable enough if we consider that
the average number of scientific (and pseudo-scientific) books
published in Germany in a single year was well over a thousand.!°

But the response was not surprising. Astronomy, from
Ptolemy to Kepler, had been a purely descriptive geography of
the sky. Its task was to provide maps of the fixed stars, timetables
of the motions of sun, moon, and planets, and of such
special events as eclipses, oppositions, conjunctions, solstices,
equinoxes, and the rest. The physical causes of the motions,
the forces of nature behind them, were not the astronomer’s
concern. 

Whenever necessary, a few epicycles were added to the
existing machinery of wheels — which did not matter much
since they were fictional anyway, and nobody believed in their
physical reality. The hierarchy of cherubim and seraphim who
were supposed to keep the wheels turning was, since the end
of the Middle Ages, regarded as another polite, poetic fiction.
Thus the physics of the sky had become a complete blank.
There were events but no causes, motions but no moving forces.
The astronomer’s task was to observe, describe, and predict,
not to search for causes — ‘theirs not to reason why’. Aristotelian
physics, which made any rational and causal approach to the
heavenly phenomena unthinkable, was on the wane, but it had
left only a vacuum behind it. Ears were still ringing with the
vanished song of the star-spinning angels, but all was silence.
In that fertile silence the unformed, stammering voice of the
young theologian-turned-astronomer obtained an immediate
hearing.

Opinions were divided, according to the philosophy of the
scholars. The modern and empirically minded, such as Galileo
in Padua and Praetorius in Altdorf, rejected Kepler’s mystical a
priori speculations and with them the whole book, without
realizing the explosive new ideas hidden among the chaff.
Galileo, especially, seems to have been prejudiced from the beginning 
against Kepler, of which we shall hear more later on.

Those, however, who lived on the other side of the watershed,
 who believed in the ageless dream of an a priori deduction of
 the cosmic order, were enthusiastic and delighted. Most
of all, of course, the endearing Maestlin, who wrote to the
Tuebingen Senate:

The subject is new and has never before occurred to anybody. It
is most ingenious and deserves in the highest degree to be made
known to the world of learning. Who has ever dared before to
ink, and much less to try to expose and explain a priori and, so
to speak, out of the hidden knowledge of the Creator, the number,
order, magnitude, and motion of the spheres? But Kepler has
indertaken and successfully done just this. ... Henceforth [astronomers]
 shall be freed from the necessity of exploring the dimensions
the spheres a posteriori, that is by the method of observations