
 nobility and disinterestedness for which they showed
themuelves #o avid in thin matter, This, it need scarcely be
said, wan friendship, In this field, let us add, we shall have
no need to look far, Without denying that other influences
might have been operative, even in the full assurance that
they were so, we must admit it to be highly probable that
none could compare in importance with that of the De
Amicitia of Cicero.

For here at any rate, in the De Amicitia, the men of the
twelfth century found much they felt able to borrow; either
as it stood or adapted to their needs, Let us not be tempted
however to multiply disputable analogies. Let us simply
retain a small number of notions whose influence can hardly
be denied.

I. Calling to mind Cicero’s splendid eulogy of friendship
(Cap. VI) we may expressly retain, as a point of technical
importance, the identification of friendship with what he
calls benevolentia. The English ‘‘benevolence” is hardly a
satisfactory equivalent—“‘good-will” would be better. 
Benevolentia really means the sentiment that wishes the good of
the beloved for the sake only of the beloved himself.
 Kinship can exist without it, but not so friendship. Hence we
see how far friendship outweighs the family tie: “‘sublata
enim benevolentia nomen amicitiae tollitur, propinquitatis
manet” (Cap. V). .

II. The source of friendship lies in love as opposed to
practical utility. By this we must understand that benevolentia s
prings from an inward feeling of affection (sensum
diligendi), a certain tenderness (caritatem), whereby we will
nothing but the good of the beloved (Cap. VIII).

III. Hence advantage attends upon friendship, but cannot be 
admitted as its motive: “Sed, quanquam utilitates
multae et magnae consecutae sunt, non sunt tamen ab
earum spe causae diligendi profectae” (Cap. IX).—‘“‘Amare
autem, nihil aliud est, nisi eum ipsum diligere, quem ames,
nulla indigentia, nulla utilitate quaesita” (Cap. XXVII).

IV. Consequently the whole fruit of friendship lies in the
very love of good-will which we bear our friend: “. -- sic
amicitiam, non spe mercedis adducti, sed quod omnis ejus
fructus in ipso amore inest, expetendam putamus” (Cap. IX).
Cf. ‘“Atque etiam mihi quidem videntur, qui utilitatis causa
fingunt amicitias, amabilissimum nodum amicitiae tollere:
non enim tam utilitas parta per amicum, quam amici amor
ipse, delectat. . . . Non igitur utilitatem amicitia, sed
utilitas amicitiam, consecuta est” (Cap. XIV). We shall
eventually encounter in St. Bernard himself an almost
literal reminiscence of Cicero: ‘‘fructus ejus, usus ejus.” 4

V. Friendship is the offspring of virtue, but no man
becomes attached to another on account of his virtue
unless he is virtuous himself. And-so, when all is said, the
deepest cause of friendship lies in likeness; for nature loves
nothing so much as that which resembles it: “Quod si
etiam illud addimus, quod recti addi potest, nihil esse,
quod ad se rem ullam tam alliciat, tam attrahat, quam
ad amicitiam similitudo: concedetur profecto verum esse,
ut bonos boni diligant, addiscantque sibi quasi propinquitate
conjunctos, atque natura: nihil enim est appetentius
similium sui, nihil rapacius quam natura” (Cap. XIV).

VI. And let us add this last trait, to which at-first we
might fail to attach the importance we shall see it to have
later on: the sentiment of friendship is essentially reciprocal.
It is a mutual accord of wills, a ‘‘consensio”’.

Not one of these various elements but entered into the
texture of Cistercian mysticism, and the more important
of them, it would seem, had a certain influence on the
courtly conception of love. Cicero’s benevolentia bears a
strong resemblance to the bonne volonté of Chrétien of Troyes;

the doctrine of the disinterestedness of true love, in the
SSS ee ee