

swarmed from the earth like honeybees till the boughs shook.
Lean, lily-footed dancers doffed their crimson sandals,
unbound their scented sashes, hung them on full boughs
until the tall trees gleamed as though a thousand snakes,
bright-plumaged birds, and the moon’s silvered phantoms perched

Groping the ground with their tall staffs, their heads held high,
seven blind minstrels stumbled in the rich rose-gardens
and held their ancient well-versed lyres in tight embrace.
On joy’s rich feasting boards the archons placed a coffin
as grim reminder to carouse till the world darkened,
till a gaunt mummy in their orgies loomed and beckoned.
One blind bard pressed his ear against his somber lyre,
plucked at thé chords and heard a song as yet unborn
that kicked within his heart to erupt and please the king.
“Great God, who once gouged out my eyes, stuff up my ears,
thrust a large lump of mud into my greedy mouth
and tear my soul out as one tears a fish’s gills!
Dear God, I’m weary of singing now to thankless kings!”
Then memory, like a jackal, scratched in the bard’s skull,
his heart was coiled with venomous snakes, and his mind hung,
a blind thrush in its bony mew, and sang of Death.
The blind bard listened to the grim song in his heart
and shuddered, for he thought his voice this day would be
most sweet to hearten the dead and living among the trees;
alas, his mind swooped on the king’s feast like a black crow.
Meanwhile, as sweat poured down his sallow cheeks, far down
in the earth’s cellars, slaves spread out Death’s final feast
with tray on tray of luscious food and cooling wines;
bare-breasted girls brought roses and rich fragrances
that those about to die might taste all earth could give.
Nile’s savage forehead glittered like a shaft of light,
the blond sea-captains sat among the bare-thighed girls,
and at the table’s head, with all his friends about him,
the tall: head of the castle-wrecker leapt like flame.
High on a nail the muddy and blood-splattered mask
of his wild god hung down, and the wall dripped with blood.
The old friends ate and drank and held their souls tight-reined
for fear they’d break out in great sobs and savage groans,
and then the piper drew his seven-reeded pipe
and played a scofling, taunting tune to mock at Death,
but when the lone man turned and scowled, the piper stopped
and listened to the sage man’s noble calm advice:
“Man’s soul may seek for Death in many varied ways:
some wail, some laugh with fear, and some with boastful words
call manfully on the dark slayer to come and fight,
and some stretch out their necks like meck, obedient lambs.

