 “Crete, for me (and not, naturally, for all Cretans),
synthesis which I always pursue, the synthesis of Greece and the
 neither feel Europe in me nor a clear and distilled classical
nor do I at all feel the anarchic chaos and the will-less persevered
the Orient. I feel something else, a synthesis, a being that not only
you the abyss without disintegrating, but which, on the contrary, is
with coherence, pride, and manliness by such a vision. This glance
I, confronts life and death so bravely, I call Cretan.”

Kaznwntzakis then goes on to trace the Cretan Glance to its origins in
old pre-classical Minoan civilization of Crete. Minoan Crete, with its
earthquakes symbolized by the Bull-God, and with the acrobatic
Game which the Cretans played with this same Bull, was a true realization 
of what Kazantzakis considered to be the superior vision: the Synthes, 
The Cretan bull-rituals had no relationship to the bullfights of
western Spain. 

The Cretans confronted the Bull—the Titan-Earthquake—
without fear, with undimmed eyes, nor killed him in order to unite with
iii (the Orient) or to be released from his presence (Greece), but played
with him at their ease. “This direct contact with the Bull honed the
strength of the Cretan, cultivated the flexibility and charm of his body,
laming yet cool exactness of movement, the discipline of desire, and
the hard-won virility to measure himself against the dark and powerful
Hull-Titan. And thus the Cretan transformed terror into a high game
wherein man’s virtue, in a direct contact with the beast, became tempered,
and triumphed. The Cretan triumphed without killing the abominable
hull because he did nat think of it as an enemy but as 2 collaborate
without it his body would not have become so strong and charming or his
spirit so manly. Of course, to endure and to play such a dangerous-game,
one needs great bodily and spiritual training and a sleepless discipline of
nerves; but if a man once trains himself and becomes skillful in the game,
then every one of his movements becomes simple, certain, and graceful.
The heroic and playful eyes, without hope yet without fear, which so
confront the Bull, the Abyss, I call the Cretan Glance.”

Kazantzakis was well aware that throughout the world and in contemporary 
Greece other clear glances existed, filled with light and nobility,
which looked on the world with greater composure and did not inflame
it with tension. He respected and rejoiced in the Apollonian or classical
ordered vision of life, he was drawn to it and influenced by it even more
than he realized, but he did not consider it to be either his own particular
view or the one which could best gaze upon and understand the violent
transitions of the modern world. “The epoch through which we are passing,” 
he wrote, “seems to me decidedly anti-classical. It seems to break
the molds in political, economic, and social life, in thought and in action
in order to achieve a new balance—a new classical age—on a higher plane;
to create that which we have called a new Myth, and which might give a
new and synchronized meaning to the world at last. Our age is a savage
one; the Bull, the underground Dionysian powers, has been unleashed;
the Apollonian crust of the earth is cracking. [“And what rough beast,”

