
and Rala fluttered like a glowworm, all flame and light
that flits and glows in darkness through the dew-drenched air
while God licks her refulgent belly, a blue-green flame.

The enduring man admired intently her black eyes,
her thin-boned body, her lean sword-sharp lips, and thought:
“How often have I not seen maids, like poor night-moths,
leap in the flames to burn when new fires sweep the world!

In that strong spiral they forget a woman’s duty,
disdain to bear earth children, cut their richt breasts off
to their mai ts to shoot their arrows unim eded
and thus rush free into God’s armies, bold, one-breasted.”
Rala smiled gently and approached the wounded man:
“Stranger, you're tired and your eyes burn; sleep yet a while,
there’s time for souls to know each other and flames to meet.”
She placed her cooling hand then on his sea-swept brow
and his mind grew serene, his flaming eyelids closed,
though his lips quivered still, still hooked by brimming words,
but Rala tenderly placed her fingers on his lips,
and then he heard her murmur gently: “Be silent, child,”
and the ferocious killer shook before a woman’s sweetness,
He shut his mind’s five gates, trembled, and thought how even
the smallest virgin maiden cradles each grown man
tight in her arms like her own son, even though he were a god.
Meanwhile the three companions in a corner quarreled,
and Scarab, with a glowering face, put Hawkeye straight:
“Many’s the time I’ve warned you, but to no good end,
for you've no patience, you make all our secrets plain.

I’ve often wondered how your scissor-tongue finds time
to blab of flames, loves, hungers, vengeances, and fleets!
I’ve always had my doubts about this stranger here;
he’s not a worker, but a sly ship-owning thief
who sells and then resells the world like his cheap wares
nor cares a straw for vengeance or the starving poor.

I know this man’s perverse and two-faced kind too well:
he moves so fast that in his hearth no ash may stay.”
But Hawkeye grabbed his comrade by his ruthless knees:
“Brother, I feel this stranger has some mighty power,
he seems like a far-traveled man, a flame, a Cretan.
Let’s let him cast his fire on earth with us a moment.”
Nile burst out laughing till his bald head gleamed with sweat:
“Stop brawling, friends! I think that you've both spoken well.
He's a shipmaster, a great lord who plays with fire
and now drifts by this blaze we've fed on desert sands,
Let him be welcome with his torch, welcome his leaving!”
In silence Rala gazed on the strange vagrant’s form,

