

but I have never been able to satisfy myself what it is that produces
thought. I am even ignorant whether my understanding is a simple faculty
like that of walking or digesting, or if I think with my head in the same
manner as I take hold of a thing with my hands. . . . I talk a great deal,
and when I have done speaking I remain confounded and ashamed of what
I have said.”

The same day I had a conversation with an old woman, his neighbor.
I asked her if she had ever been unhappy for not understanding how her soul
was made? She did not even comprehend my question. She had not, for the
briefest moment in her life, had a thought about these subjects with which
the good Brahmin had so tormented himself. She believed in the bottom of
her heart in the metamorphoses of Vishnu, and provided she could get some
of the sacred water of the Ganges in which to make her ablutions, she
thought herself the happiest of women. Struck with the happiness of this
poor creature, I returned to my philosopher, whom I thus addressed:

“Are you not ashamed to be thus miserable when, not fifty yards from
you, there is an old automaton who thinks of nothing and lives contented?”

“You are right,” he replied. “I have said to myself a thousand times that
I should be happy if I were but as ignorant as my old neighbor; and yet
Bra : 3 snes eter

This reply of the Brahmin made a greater impression on me than anything
that had passed.%2

Even if Philosophy should end in the total doubt of Montaigne’s “Que
Sais-je?”’** it is man’s greatest adventure, and his noblest. Let us learn
to be content with modest advances in knowledge, rather than be forever
weaving new systems out of our mendacious imagination.

We must not say, Let us begin by inventing principles whereby we may be
able to explain everything; rather we must say, Let us make an exact analysis
of the matter, and then we shall try to see, with much diffidence, if it fits
in with any principle.*4 . . . The Chancellor Bacon had shown the road
which science might follow. . . . But then Descartes appeared and did just
the contrary of what he should have done: instead of studying nature, he
wished to divine her. . . . This best of mathematicians made only romances
in philosophy.®* . . . It is given us to calculate, to weigh, to measure, to
observe; this is natural philosophy; almost all the rest is chimera.®*


Under ordinary circumstances it is probable that Voltaire would never
have passed out of the philosophic calm of this courteous scepticism to
the arduous controversies of his later years. The aristocratic circles in
which he moved agreed so readily with his point of view that there was
mo incentive to polemics; even the priests smiled with him over the

difficulties of the faith, and cardinals considered whether, after all, 
they might not yet make him into a good Capuchin. What were the events
that turned him from the polite persiflage of agnosticism to a bitter 
anticlericalism which admitted no compromise, but waged relentless war to
“crush the infamy” of ecclesiasticism?

Not far from Ferney lay Toulouse, the seventh city of France. In Voltaire’s day 
the Catholic clergy enjoyed absolute sovereignty there; the
city commemorated with frescoes the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes
(an edict which had given freedom of worship to Protestants), and celebrated 
as a great saint the day of the Momacre of St Besiolomew, No
Protestant in Toulouse could be a lawyer, or a physician, or an 
apothecary, or a grocer, or a book-seller, or a printer; nor could a Catholic
keep a Protestant servant or clerk—in 1748 a woman had been fined
3000 francs for using a Protestant midwife.

Now it happened that Jean Calas, a Protestant of Toulouse, had a
daughter who became a Catholic, and a son who hanged himself, 
presumably because of disappointment in business. There was a law in
Toulouse that every suicide should be placed naked on a hurdle, with
face down, drawn thus through the streets, and then hanged on a gibbet.
The father, to avert this, asked his relatives and his friends to testify to
a natural death. In consequence, rumor began to talk of murder, and to
hint that the father had killed the son to prevent his imminent 
conversion to Catholicism. Calas was arrested, put to the torture, and died
soon after (1761). His family, ruined and hunted, fled to Ferney, and
sought the aid of Voltaire. He took them into his home, comforted them,
and marveled at the story of medieval persecution which they told.

About the same time (1762) came the death of Elizabeth Sirvens;
again rumor charged that she had been pushed into a well just as she
was about to announce her conversion to Catholicism. That a timid
minority of Protestants would hardly dare to behave in this way was a
rational consideration, and therefore out of the purview of rumor.—In
1765 a young man by the name of La Barre, aged sixteen, was arrested
on the charge of having mutilated crucifixes. Subjected to torture, he
confessed his guilt; his head was cut off, and his body was flung into
the flames, while the crowd applauded. A copy of Voltaire’s Philosophié
Dictionary, which had been found on the lad, was burned with him.

For almost the first time in his life, Voltaire became a thoroughly
serious man. When d’Alembert, disgusted equally with state, church and
people, wrote that hereafter he would merely mock at everything, 
Voltaire answered, “This is not a time for jesting; wit does not harmonize
with massacres. . . . Is this the country of philosophy and pleasure? It
is rather the country of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.” It was with
Voltaire now as with Zola and Anatole France in the case of Dreyfus;
this tyrannous injustice lifted him up; he ceased to be merely a man of