
Perhaps their faded letters and the loosened leaves of their
diaries, recording birthdays, summer Parties, birthdays, are 
lying in a compartment of his mahogany desk. Or it may be that
in the full-bellied commode at the back of his bedroom there is
a drawer, in which their spring dresses are kept—white dresses
that were worn for the first time at Easter, dresses of dotted
tulle which properly belong in the summer, for which one
could not wait. 

Oh, what a happy fate, to sit in the quiet room
of an ancestral house, among many calm, sedentary things, and,
outside in the airy, light-green garden, to hear the first wrens
trying their skill, and in the distance the village clock. To sit and
watch a warm streak of afternoon sun and know many things
about girls of bygone days and be a poet. And to think that I
too would have become such a poet, had I been allowed to
live somewhere, anywhere in the world, in one of those many 
closed-up country houses about which no one troubles. I would
have used only one room (the light room in the gable). There I
would have lived with my old things, the family portraits, the
books. And I would have had an armchair and flowers and dogs
and a stout stick for the stony roads. And nothing more. Only a
book bound in yellowish, ivory-colored leather, with an old
flowery design on the fly-leaf: in that I would have written, I
would have written a great deal, for I would have had many 
thoughts and many people’s memories.

But things have fallen out otherwise, God will know why.
My old furniture is rotting in a barn where I have been allowed
to put it, while I myself—yes, my God—have no roof over me,
and the rain rains into my eyes.


Occasionally I pass by little shops—in the rue de Seine, for
O example. Dealers in antiques or small second-hand booksellers 
or vendors of engravings with overcrowded windows.
No one ever enters their shops; they apparently do no business.
But if one looks in, they are sitting there, sitting and reading,
without a care; they take no thought for the morrow, are not
anxious about any success, have a dog that sits before them, all
good-nature, or a cat that makes the silence still greater by 
gliding along the rows of books, as if it were rubbing the names off
their backs.

Ah, if that were enough: sometimes I would like to buy such
a full shop-window for myself and to sit down behind it with
a dog for twenty years.

T Is good to say it out aloud: “Nothing has happened.” Once
I more: “Nothing has happened.” Does that help?

That my stove began to smoke again and I had to go out, is
really no misfortune. That I feel weary and chilled is of 
no consequence. That I have been running about the streets all day
is my own fault. I might just as well have sat in the Louvre. But
no, I could not have done that. There are certain people who go
there to warm themselves. They sit on the velvet benches, and
their feet stand like big empty boots side by side on the gratings
of the hot-air registers. They are extremely modest men who
are thankful when the attendants in their dark-blue uniforms
studded with medals suffer their presence. But when J enter,
they grimace, They grimace and nod slightly. And then, when
I go back and forth before the pictures, they keep me in view,