In the first place I should be glad to see this
good relationship — to put it no more strongly than that 
restored at least between Father and me, and further, I set great
store by seeing it restored between the two of us. A good
relationship is infinitely preferable to a misunderstanding.

Now I must trouble you with certain abstract matters, hoping
that you will listen to them patiently. I am a man of passions,
capable of and given to doing more or less outrageous things for
which I sometimes feel a little sorry. Every so often I say or do
something too hastily, when it would have been better to have
shown a little more patience. Other people also act rashly at
times, I think.

This being the case, what can be done about it? Should I
consider myself a dangerous person, unfit for anything? I think
not. Rather, every means should be tried to put these very passions 
to good effect.

To mention just one by way of an example, I have a more or
less irresistible passion for books and the constant need to
improve my mind, to study if you like, just as I have a need to
eat bread. You will understand that. When I lived in other
surroundings, surroundings full of pictures and works of art, I
conceived a violent, almost fanatical passion for those surroundings, 
as you know. And I do not regret that, and even now, far
from home, I often feel homesick for the land of pictures.

You may remember that I knew very well (and it may be that
I know it still) what Rembrandt was or what Millet was or Jules
Dupré or Delacroix or Millais or Matthijs Maris.

Well, today I am no longer in those surroundings, yet they
say that what is known as the soul never dies but lives on for
ever, continuing to seek for ever and again.

So instead of succumbing to my homesickness I told myself:
your land, your fatherland, is all around. So instead of giving in
to despair I chose active melancholy, in so far as I was capable of
activity, in other words I chose the kind of melancholy that
hopes, that strives and that seeks, in preference to the melancholy
that despairs numbly and in distress. I accordingly made a more
or less serious study of the books within my reach, such as 
Michelet’s La révolution francaise, and then last
winter Shakespeare and a little Victor Hugo and Dickens and
Beecher Stowe and recently Aeschylus and then various less
classical writers, a few great minor masters. You know, don’t
you, that Fabritius and Bida are counted among the minor
masters?

Now anyone who becomes absorbed in all this is sometimes
considered outrageous, ‘shocking’,’ sinning more or less
unwittingly against certain forms and customs and proprieties. It 1s a
pity that people take that amiss.

You know, for example, that I have often neglected my
appearance. I admit it, and I also admit that it is ‘shocking’. But
look here, lack of money and poverty have something to do with
it too, as well as a profound disillusionment, and besides, it is
sometimes a good way of ensuring the solitude you need, of
concentrating more or less on whatever study you are immersed
in. One essential study is that of medicine. There is scarcely
anybody who does not try to acquire some knowledge of it, who
does not at least try to grasp what it is about (and you see, I still
know absolutely nothing about it). And all these things absorb
you, preoccupy you, set you dreaming, musing and thinking.

Now for the past 5 years Or So, I don’t know how long exactly,
I have been more or less without permanent employment, wandering 
from pillar to post. You will say, ever since such and such a
time you have been going downhill, you have been feeble, you
have done nothing. Is that entirely true?

What is true is that I have at times earned my own crust, and
at other times a friend has given it to me out of the goodness of
his heart. I have lived whatever way I could, for better or for
worse, taking things just as they came. It is true that I have
forfeited the trust of various people, it is true that my financial
affairs are in a sorry state, it is true that my future looks rather
bleak, it is true that I might have done better, it is true that I
have wasted time when it comes to earning a living, it is true
that my studies are in a fairly lamentable and appalling state,

