

hence of Spina’s imitation of Him is impressively darkened in The
Seed Beneath the Snow by a special quality that goes far to justify
the static mood that pervades the book. It is the quality of dying.

“And there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.”
‘The Lenten season during which the sparse events of The Seed
Beneath the Snow enact themselves represents the three dark hours
of Good Friday, the hours of the agony on the cross; and both are
made to symbolize the darkened agony of Italy under fascism, of
the modern world under its variety of crucifixions. Two moments
in the novel underscore the point. In one of them, the grotesque
Don Marcantonio, who dreams horribly of a fusion of Nazi and
Fascist, discusses with the carpenter Eutimio the idea of attaching a
fascio to a local cross. “But where will that leave the head of Our
Lord?” asks Eutimio. “You forget,” replies Marcantonio, “that
Jesus is no longer on the cross.” “But there are some who believe
he still is,” the carpenter says, “still on the cross, still in agony.”
And later, Spina and Faustina confront a shrine in the country,
where the image of the dying contorted Christ is disturbingly
realistic.

“He is not dead yet,” said Pietro. “Faustina, do you think that
some day he will die?”
“What a country,” murmured Faustina to herself.

The country of The Seed Beneath the Snow is a country of seemingly 
permanent Good Friday—and its quality of prolonged suspension (even 
in the literal meaning of that word), of excruciatingly
painful immobility, is just the quality Silone has managed to convey
in his pages. The seed is imagined beneath the snow; it is known
to be there and will someday emerge; but what we are made
conscious of is the endless monotony of the snow.

It is, finally, just that sense of terrible prolongation that is
 established by the voluminous talk throughout the novel about the
nature of human speech. Once again, and yet more radically, there
appears a distinction between two worlds, two societies: or better,
here, two universes of discourse—the universe of Fascist rhetoric,
where truth has yielded altogether to sophistry, in a tidal wave of
bel parlare; and the universe of Spina and Infante, where language
is stripped to its minimal elements and to the point where once
more it touches upon the reality of experience—where it serves as
communication among companions. Spina and the deaf-mute (or,
perhaps, partly deaf near-mute) inhabit in their filthy hovel that lost
Eden dimly longed for by Michele in Moravia’s The Time of Indifference—
‘‘a paradise where everything—gestures, words, feelings—
would have a direct connection with the reality in which they had
originated.” Silone is here able to exploit the literal in the interests
of the symbolic: to extend the realistic to arrive at the reality. Infante, 
like any man of limited intelligence learning the Italian language for the 
first time (for example, like some of the English and American soldiers 
in Italy during the Second World War), expresses himself solely in 
the infinitive forms of verbs. He cannot say, “Faustina é partita” 
(Faustina has gone); he can only say, “Faustina partire” (Faustina go).*° 

But Spina finds this admirable— more precise, closer to truth, than the past indicative.
With the infinitive, everything becomes present, everything is
still unfolding. ... With the infinitive, the past is forced to repeat
itself in the present, the future to anticipate itself. It is an almost
magical operation. “Faustina partire” is more moving, more powerful,
and indeed more exact than “Faustina é partita.”

The whole of The Seed Beneath the Snow is in the infinitive
mood: that is what its mood of stasis means to reflect. And the
stasis itself is grounded in the tragic reality that only the infinitive
can accurately render. The career of Pietro Spina unfolds in a
world best defined not by the phase “Gesta morto,” but by the
phrase “Gest morire.” “In the sacred history of man on earth, it
is still, alas, Good Friday.”

It is no easier to date the effective termination of Silone’s static
mood than it is to date his departure from the Communist Party.
In both cases, the evidence is almost entirely internal, invisible
symptoms of the spirit. It is a fact, however, that in 1941, two years
after the outbreak of the war and a decade after his formal expulsion, 
Silone began again to participate overtly in political activity
as secretary of the Foreign Headquarters of the Italian Socialist
Party, in Zurich. He functioned as editor and publisher of the
weekly newspaper, L’Avvenire dei lavoratori (The Future of the
Workers); and after the occupation of southern France, Silone’s
chief obligation was the dispatching of news—that is, of the truth