

From the statues found at Viterbo at the beginning of the
pontificate of Alexander VI it is also clear that sculpture was
valued and brought to a high degree of perfection in Tuscany.
It is impossible to be precise about dates, but from the style
of the figures and from the way the tombs and buildings are
constructed, as well as from inscriptions in those Tuscan
letters, it may be conjectured that they are very old and that
they were made at a time of greatness and prosperity. 

But what more convincing evidence of this can there be than the
bronze figure representing Bellerophon’s Chimaera which
was discovered in our own times, in 1554, when ditches and
walls were being built for the fortification of Arezzo? This
figure proves that the art of sculpture had reached perfection
among the Tuscans in very early times. It is Etruscan in style,
and, moreover, there are some letters cut in one of the paws
which, it is conjectured (since today no one can understand
the Etruscan language), give the name of the artist and possibly
the date according to the usage of those times. Because of its
beauty and antiquity, this work has today been placed by the
Lord Duke Cosimo in the hall of the new rooms at his
palace, where I recently painted scenes from the life of Pope
Leo X.! As well as this, in the very same place and the very
same style were discovered a number of little bronze figures.
These, too, are now in the possession of the duke.

The works made by the Greeks, the Ethiopians, and the
Chaldeans are all of equally uncertain antiquity, just as much
as, or more than, ours are, and so all our judgements contain
a large element of uncertainty. However, our conjectures are
not so fanciful as to be completely wide of the mark, and I
do not think that I myself have strayed from the truth. I am
sure that anyone who considers the question carefully will
come to the same conclusions as I have reached above:
namely, that the origin of the arts we are discussing was
nature itself, and that the first image or model was the
beautiful fabric of the world, and that the master who taught
us was that divine light infused in us by special grace, which
has made us not only superior to the animal creation but even,
if one may say so, like God Himself. 

Now, in our own time (as I hope to show a little farther on by 
a number of examples) simple children, brought up roughly in primitive 
surroundings, have started to draw instinctively, using as their only
models the trees around them, the lovely paintings and
sculptures of nature, and guided only by their own lively
intelligence. But the first men were more perfect and endowed 
with more intelligence, seeing that they lived nearer
the time of the Creation; and they had nature for their guide,
the purest intellects for their teachers, and the world as their
beautiful model. So is there not every reason for believing
that they originated these noble arts and that from modest
beginnings, improving them little by little, they finally perfected them?

It goes without saying that the arts must have been discovered 
by some one person; and I realize that someone made
a beginning at some time. And of course it is possible for one
man to have helped another, and to have taught and opened
the way to design, colour, and relief; for I know that our art
consists first and foremost in the imitation of nature but then,
since it cannot reach such heights unaided, in the imitation of
the most accomplished artists. Still, I think it is very dangerous
to insist that the origin of the arts can be traced to this or that
person, and in any case this is hardly something we need to
worry about. We have, after all, already seen what is the true
origin and basis of art. An artist lives and acquires fame
through his works; but with the passing of time, which consumes
everything, these works - the first, then the second,
then the third — fade away. When there were no writers there
was no way of leaving for posterity any record of works of
art, and so the artists themselves also sank into obscurity.
Then, when writers started to commemorate what had been
done before their time, they could only take note of artists
of whom some knowledge had come down to them; and so
the first artists of whom any record was made are those whose
memory was the most recent. For example, by general agreement
 the first of the poets was said to have been Homer.