

famous pass of the Trossachs opening out on the winding Wl
wooded shores of the lovely Loch Katrine, the Halloween
bonfires were still kindled do
eighteenth century. When the fire had died down, the @
were carefully collected in the form of a circle, and a stone
put in, near the circumference, for every person of the sever
families interested in the bonfire. Next morning, if any of the
stones was found to be displaced or injured, the people mid
sure that the person represented by it was fey* or devoted, an
that he could not live twelve months from that day.

In Queen’s County, to the latter part of the
nineteenth century child divination on Hallowe’en. Girls went out
blindfold and pulled up cabbages: if the cabbage was well
grown, the girl would have a handsome husband, but if it hat
a crooked stalk, the future spouse would be a stingy old milf
Nuts, again, were placed in pairs on the bar of the fire, am
from their behaviour omens were drawn of the fate in love al
marriage of the couple whom they represented. Lead, also,
melted and allowed to drop into a tub of cold water, and f
the shapes which it assumed in the water predictions were made
to the children of their future destiny. Again, apples wen
bobbed for in a tub of water and brought up with the teeth; 
a stick was hung from a hook with an apple at one end and
candle at the other, and the stick being made to revolve you
made a bite at the apple and sometimes got a mouthful of candle
instead. In County Leitrim, also, down to near the end of
nineteenth century various forms of divination were practiced
at Hallowe’en. Girls ascertained the character of their full
husbands by the help of cabbages just as in Queen’s County
Again, if a girl found a branch of a briar-thorn which had been
over and grown into the ground so as to form a loop, she would
creep through the loop thrice late in the evening in the devil’
name, then cut the briar and put it under her pillow, all without
speaking a word. Then she would lay her head on the pillow
and dream of the man she was to marry. Boys, also, 
dream in like manner of love and marriage at Hallowe’en, i
only they would gather ten leaves of ivy without speaking
throw away one, and put the other nine under their pillow.

Again, divination . was practised by means of a cake called

juvm-breac, in which a nut and a ring were baked. Whoever got
The ring would be married first; whoever got the nut would
surrey a widow or a widower, but if the nut were an empty shell,
or she would remain unwed. Again, a girl would take a clue
I worsted, go to a lime kiln in the gloaming, and throw the
into the kiln in the devil’s name, while she held fast the
Other end of the thread. Then she would rewind the thread and
wk, ‘Who holds my clue?’ and the name of her future husband
