

blocking, or “choice.” After all those years of practice there came
a day when it just happened-how, or why, Herrigel never understood.

The same is true in learning to use the brush for writing or
painting. The brush must draw by itself. This cannot happen if
one does not practice constantly. But neither can it happen if one
makes an effort. Similarly, in swordsmanship one must not first
decide upon a certain thrust and then attempt to make it, since
by that time it will be too late. Decision and action must be
 simultaneous. This was the point of Dogen’s image of firewood
and ashes, for to say that firewood does not “become” ashes is
to say that it has no intention to be ash before it is actually
 ash and then it is no longer firewood. Dogen insisted that the two
states were “clearly cut,” and in the same way Herrigel’s master
did not want him to “mix” the two states of stretching and releasing the bow. 

He instructed him to draw it to the point of
fullest tension and stop there without any purpose, any intention
in mind as to what to do next. Likewise, in Dogen’s view of
za-zen one must be sitting “just to sit” and there must not be any
intention to have satori.

The sudden visions of nature which form the substance of
haiku arise in the same way, for they are never there when one
looks for them. The artificial haiku always feels like a piece of life
which has been deliberately broken off or wrenched away from
the universe, whereas the genuine haiku has dropped off all by
itself, and has the whole universe inside it.

Artists and craftsmen of the Far East have, indeed, measured,
analyzed, and classified the techniques of the masters to such a
degree that by deliberate imitation they can come close to “deceiving, 
if it were possible, even the elect,” By all quantitative
standards the work so contrived is indistinguishable from its
models, just as bowmen and swordsmen trained by quite other
methods can equal the feats of Zen-inspired samurai. But, so far
as Zen is concerned, the end results have nothing to do with it.
For, as we have seen all along, Zen has no goal; it is a traveling
without point, with nowhere to go. To travel is to be alive, but
to get somewhere is to be dead, for as our own proverb says, “To
travel well is better than to arrive.”

A world which increasingly consists of destinations without
journeys between them, a world which values only “getting, 
somewhere” as fast as possible, becomes a world without substance,
‘One can get anywhere and everywhere, and yet the more this is
possible, the less is anywhere and everywhere worth jetting, to,
For points of arrival are too abstract, too Euclidean to he enjoyed,
nd it is all very much like eating the precise ends of a banana
without getting what lies in between. The point, therefore, of
these arts is the doing of them rather than the accomplishments,
But, more than this, the real joy of them lies in what turn tp
unintentionally in the course of practice, just as the joy of travel
is not nearly so much in getting where one wants to jo as in
the unsought surprises which occur on the journey,

_ Planned surprises are as much of a contradiction as intentional
satori, and whoever aims at satori is after all like a person who
sends himself Christmas presents for fear that others will forget

One must simply face the fact that Zen is all that side ol
life which is completely beyond our control, and which will not
come to us by any amount of forcing or wangling or cunning stratagems
 which produce only fakes of the real thing. But the
last word of Zen is not an absolute dualism-the rather barren
world of controlled action on the one side, and the spontaneous
world of uncontrolled surprise on the other. For who controls
the controller?

Because Zen does not involve an ultimate dualism between
the controller and the controlled, the mind and the body, the
spiritual and the material, there is always a certain physto
logical” aspect to its techniques. Whether Zen is practiced
through za-zen or cha-no-yu or kendo, great importance is at
tached to the way of breathing. Not only is breathing one of the
two fundamental rhythms of the body; it is also the process in
which control and spontaneity, voluntary and involuntary action,