
went to the depths in the search for new sensations. What
the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought, perversity
became to me in the sphere of passion. Desire, at the end,
was a malady, or a madness, or both. I grew careless of
the lives of others. I took pleasure where it pleased me and
passed on. I forgot that every little action of the common
day makes or unmakes character, and that therefore what
one has done in the secret chamber one has some day to cry
aloud on the housetops. I ceased to be Lord over myself. I
was no longer the Captain of my Soul,” and did not know it.
L allowed you to dominate me, and your father to frighten
me. I ended in horrible disgrace. There is only one thing for
me now, absolute Humility: just as there is only one thing
for you, absolute Humility also. You had better come down
into the dust and learn it beside me.

I have lain in prison for nearly two years. Out of my
nature has come wild despair; an abandonment to grief
that was piteous even to look at: terrible and impotent
rage: bitterness and scorn: anguish that wept aloud: misery
that could find no voice: sorrow that was dumb. I have
passed through every possible mood of suffering. Better
than Wordsworth himself I know what Wordsworth meant
when he said:

Suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark
And has the nature of Infinity.”

But while there were times when I rejoiced in the idea that
my sufferings were to be endless, I could not bear them to
be without meaning. Now I find hidden away in my nature
something that tells me that nothing in the whole world
1s meaningless, and suffering least of all. That something
hidden away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is
Humility.

It is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate
discovery at which I have arrived: the starting-point for a
fresh development. It has come to me right out of myself,
so I know that it has come at the proper time. It could
not have come before, nor later. Had anyone told me of
it, I would have rejected it. Had it been brought to me, I
would have refused it. As I found it, I want to keep it. I
must do so. It is the one thing that has in it the elements
of life, of a new life, a Vita Nuova* for me. Of all things
it is the strangest. One cannot give it away, and another
may not give it to one. One cannot acquire it, except by
surrendering everything that one has. It is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.

Now that I realize that it is in me, I see quite clearly what I
have got to do, what, in fact, I must do. And when I use such
a phrase as that, I need not tell you that I am not alluding to
any external sanction or command. I admit none. I am far
more of an individualist than I ever was. Nothing seems to
me of the smallest value except what one gets out of oneself.”
My nature is seeking a fresh mode of self-realisation. That is
all 1 am concerned with. And the first thing that I have got
to do is to free myself from any possible bitterness of feeling
against you.

I am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless. Yet
there are worse things in the world thar that. I am quite
candid when I tell you that rather than go out from this
prison with bitterness in my heart against you or against
the world I would gladly and readily beg my bread from
door to door. If I got nothing at the house of the rich, I
would get something at the house of the poor. Those who
have much are often greedy. Those who have little always
share. I would not a bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in
summer, and when winter came on sheltering myself by the
warm close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a great
barn, provided I had love in my heart. The external things
of life seem to me now of no importance at all. You can
see to what intensity of individualism I have arrived, or am
arriving rather, for the journey is long, and ‘where I walk
there are thorns’.*

Of course I know that to ask for alms on the highway is
not to be my lot, and that if ever I lie in the cool grass at
night-time it will be to write sonnets to the Moon. When I
go out of prison, Robbie will be waiting for me on the other
side of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol not
merely of his own affection, but of the affection of many