
PROPHETIC CRITICISM

underdeveloped world, multinational complicity in governmental corruption, 
the feminization of poverty, the impact of technology on our
lives, and the larger fate of the earth. We bear religious and moral
responsibility for others and for the world. The results of abdicating
that responsibility are apparent in the world at large by even the most
cursory glance at ecological devastation in Alaska, in the republics surrounding 
the sarcophagus of Chernobyl, and in the Amazon rain forest.
The results of abdicating responsibility for other persons are apparent
in the inner cities, where poverty, homelessness, inadequate health care,
and increasingly violent crime are rife.

The artist as a prophetic critic deals with such themes. But as Lippard
has also acknowledged, a contradiction is implicit in the creation of a
profound art about suffering, destruction, and death. “Art is a creative
act; it’s supposed to be committed to life. There are times when refusal
to depict the wholesale death that may be awaiting us is a cowardly
act; there are times when it is an act of courage.’*° How do we know
which is which? Although no absolute answers to this question are possible,
willingness to engage in reflection about the timing and appropriateness of 
varying responses is part of the artist’s task.

Let us return now to the four moments or aspects of prophecy identified at the 
outset of this chapter. First, prophecy implies that a message
is received, then shaped and responded to, by the prophet. Prophetic
language was commonly linked to other kinds of discourse: ritual repetition of 
texts, prayers, storytelling, and doctrinal debate. It invoked
tradition and moral laws known by the audience; yet these traditions
and moral laws also underwent revision. In other words, the prophetic

message_depends upon previous messages; prophets are generally not
concerned with originality. Discernment méans the ability to analyze
critically the present in relation to the past. For this, one needs a
 nuanced sense of history, as well as a strong clear vision of contemporary
society. We do have resources for regeneration; discernment is but the
first component in the prophetic process. @

The second aspect of prophecy is connection: a moral consciousness
that evolves out of empathy and the ability to feel connected with the
plight of others. A prophet makes connections between what was, what
is, and what might be. Traditionally, the individual based the claim to
be a prophet both on this personal revelation and on charisma, or what
Max Weber called ‘charismatic authorization” — the possession of magical 
and ecstatic abilities such as divination.*' A prophet could be “ethical,”
 in the sense that she or he is seen as an instrument for the
expression of divine will. In preaching and public presentation such an