
 Being, Nonbeing, and Anxiety

 Everything is tried and nothing satisfies. The
contents of the tradition, however excellent, however
praised, however loved once, lose their power to givé
content today. And present culture is even less able to
provide the content. Anxiously one turns away from all.
concrete contents and looks for an ultimate meaning, only
to discover that it was precisely the loss of a spiritual center
 which took away the meaning from the special cons
tents of the spiritual life. But a spiritual center cannot
be produced intentionally, and the attempt to produce it I
only produces deeper anxiety. The anxiety of emptiness”
drives us to the abyss of meaninglessness.
Emptiness and loss of meaning are expressions of the
threat of nonbeing to the spiritual life. This threat is 
implied in man’s finitude and actualized by man’s estrangement.
 It can be described in terms of doubt, its creative ©
and its destructive function in man’s spiritual life. Man
is able to ask because he is separated from, while participating 
, what he is asking about. In every question an
element of doubt, the awareness of not having, is implied, ©
In systematic questioning systematic doubt is effective;
e.g. of the Cartesian type. This element of doubt is a_
condition of all spiritual life. The threat to spiritual life
is not doubt as an element but the total doubt. If the
awareness of not having has swallowed the awareness of
having, doubt has ceased to be methodological asking and
has become existential despair. On the way to this situation
the spiritual life tries to maintain itself as long as 
possible by clinging to affirmations which are not yet 
undercut, be they traditions, autonomous convictions, or
emotional preferences. And if it is impossible to remove
the doubt, one courageously accepts it without surrendering
 one’s convictions. One takes the risk of going astray
and the anxiety of this risk upon oneself. In this way one
avoids the extreme situation—till it becomes unavoidable
and the despair of truth becomes complete.

Then man tries another way out: Doubt is based on
man’s separation from the whole of reality, on his lack of
universal participation, on the isolation of his individual
self. So he tries to break out of this situation, to identify
himself with something transindividual, to surrender his
separation and self-relatedness. He flees from his freedom
of asking and answering for himself toa situation in which
no further questions can be asked and the answers to previous
questions are imposed on him authoritatively. In
order to avoid the risk of asking and doubting he surrenders 
the right to ask and to doubt. He surrenders himself in order 
to save his spiritual life. He “escapes from
his freedom” (Fromm) in order to escape the anxiety of
meaninglessness. Now he is no longer lonely, not in existential 
doubt, not in despair. He “participates” and affirms
by participation the contents of his spiritual life. Meaning
is saved, but the self is sacrificed. And since the conquest
of doubt was a matter of sacrifice, the sacrifice of the freedom of 
the self, it leaves a mark on the regained certitude:
a fanatical self-assertiveness. Fanaticism is the correlate
to spiritual self-surrender: it shows the anxiety which it
was supposed to conquer, by attacking with dispropor-