

I know a second lieutenant in the Zouaves here; his name is
Milliet. I give him drawing lessons — with my perspective framé
— and he is beginning to do some drawings and, honestly, I’ve
seen far worse. He is keen to learn, has been in Tonkin, etc ..,
He is leaving for Africa in October. If you were to join the
Zouaves, he would take you along and guarantee you a fairly
large measure of freedom to paint, at least if you were willing to
help him with his artistic plans. Might this be of any use to you?
If so, let me know as soon as possible.

One reason for working is that the canvases are worth money,
Since you doubt that, you may call this reason fairly prosaic. But
it is true. One reason for not working is that canvases and paint
simply swallow up our money while they are waiting to be sold.

Drawings, on the other hand, don’t cost a lot.

Gauguin too is bored at Pont-Aven, complains just like you of
his isolation. If only you could go and see him! But I haven’t any
idea whether he means to stay, and I’m inclined to think he’s
planning to go to Paris. He told me he thought you would come
to Pont-Aven. My God, if only all three of us were here! You
will say that it’s too out of the way. All right, but think of the
winter, for here you can work all year round. The reason why I
love this country is that I have less to fear from the cold, which,
because it stops my blood circulating properly, makes it impossible 
for me to think or even do anything at all.

You will see that for yourself when you are a soldier. Then
your melancholy will be gone, which could easily be the result
of your having too little or the wrong blood, which I don’t really
think is the case.

It’s the fault of that damned foul wine in Paris and those foul
greasy steaks.

My God, I had reached the point where my blood was no
longer circulating at all, literally no longer at all. But after four
weeks it has started to circulate again. However, my dear friend,
at the same time I have had, just like you, a fit of melancholy,
from which I would have suffered as much as you, had I not
welcomed it with great pleasure as a sign that I was recovering —
which is indeed what happened.

Vincent van Gogh to Emile Bernard, c. 18 June 1888 I 365

So, don’t go back to Paris but stay in the countryside, for you
will need your strength to come through the trial of serving in
Africa. Well then, the more blood you produce beforehand, good
livelilood, the better it will be, for over there in the heat you may
not be able to do-it quite so easily.

Painting and fucking a lot don’t go together, it softens the
lain. Which is a bloody nuisance.

The symbol of St. Luke, the patron saint of painters, is, as you
know, an ox. So you just be patient as an ox if you want to work
in the artistic field. Still, bulls are lucky not to have to work at
that foul business of painting.

But what I wanted to say is this: after the period of melancholy
is over you will be stronger than before, you will recover your
health, and you will find the scenery round you so beautiful that
you will want to do nothing but paint.

I think that your poetry will change in the same way as your
painting. After a few eccentric things, you have succeeded in
doing some with Egyptian calm and a great simplicity.

‘Que l’heure est donc bréve
Qu’on passe en aimant,
C’est moins qu’un instant,
Un peu plus qu’un réve.

Le temps nous enléve
Notre enchantement.”

That’s not by Baudelaire, I don’t know who wrote it. They’re the
words of a song found in Daudet’s Nabab — that’s where I took it
from — but doesn’t it express the idea just like a shrug of the
shoulders from a real lady?

The other day I read Loti’s Madame Chrysanthéme, it includes interesting details about Japan.

My brother is holding a Claude Monet exhibition at the
moment which I should very much like to see. Guy de Maupassant

2 ‘How short, then, the hour/One spends in loving, /It is less than an instant, /Little
more than a dream. /Time strips us of/Our enchantment.’