


knelt hunched and slumped beneath it. It cannot be overstressed
how fast this all was happening.\The thumb and surrounding base
tissues were not completely detached but hung by a flap of dermis
such that Mr. Ingle’s thumb itself pointed straight down in a parody
of imperial judgment; as Stecyk, ignoring both the blood and the
high-pitched diminutives for ‘Mother’ that began to be audible a
the band saw cycled down, removed with one hand first his slacks
belt and then the metric-conversion ruler he carried in a special nap
after running mentally through the ae and determining a I
Cherry Ames RN that digital pressure around the wrist did not
control the bleeding — fashioned a deft two-knot tourniquet (w/ just
a hint of Edwardian flourish to the top’s four-loop bow, which was
even more amazing given that Stecyk constructed the special knot
with slippery scarlet hands that also supported a man’s half-fainting
weight) that stanched the flow with only one and a half turns of hi
ruler, such was the memorized precision with which Stecyk ,
placed the tourniquet just at the crucial branch between the fore:
arm’s ulnar and radial arteries. In the belling stillness after the saw’
blade stopped you could now hear the sounds of the pneumatic jack
from the Intro Auto Mechanics classroom next door. It was also now
with the spray’s cessation, that Mr. Ingle lost consciousness, so this
the last sight some of the taller boys at the flanks had was Stecyk cup:
ping Mr. Ingle’s skull at the back like a child’s and gently lowering
him—it, the big man’s een —bo the floor with one tem while” 
something both dancerly and maternal and yet not one bit girlish
about the sight that reverberated within the souls of a few in strange
ways for days and even weeks after they were shouldered aside a 7
told to break it up and give the man some air by the Auto Mechanic:
and Appliance Repair teachers, who also were brisk and adultly
to shoo him outside with all the others and their red footprints but
rather stood like subalterns at either side of the man’s upraised arm
with pendent thumb, awaiting instructions from the boy on wheth "a
they should wait for the ambulance or maybe try and put Mr. Ingle in
one of their cheap but faultlessly tuned cars and rush him right to
Calvin, speaking to Stecyk as more of a peer and being spoken to in
return without deference or hesitation.

Voc Ed students tend not to be very sensitive or emotionally agile,
and it would be too much to say that ‘everything changed’ after that
day in Industrial Arts. It was not that Leonard Stecyk became popular, 
or that the hard boys started inviting him to come out with them
on school nights to perpetrate vandalism or abuse gateway drugs. A
few of them, though, were surprised—not ashamed so much as
shaken —by their paralysis of trauma and the noxious little faggot’s actions. 
It was strange. These were tough boys: They
fought freely, took beatings from stepdads and older brothers. For
the brightest among them, their idea of what toughness was, of the
relations between coolness and actual value, had now been somewhat fucked with. 
Their accounts of the incident were confused and
varied from boy to boy. More than one alluded to Lost in Space, which
was a popular show at the time. The main change in the quality of
the future DDP’s life was that most of the Stecyk Specials and sudden
hallway punches in the upper arm’s radial nerve and other daily bits
of cruelty ceased, mostly because a strange unease came over the
hard boys when they saw or even thought of Stecyk, and real cruelty —
as every adolescent knows—requires a close attention to the object
of that cruelty. Stecyk’s actions that day did not make him more but
less special; the hard boys ceased to see him or single him out. It was
strange, and stranger still was how fast Stecyk himself forgot the
whole thing, even after Mr. Ingle returned to C. E. Potter after
‘Thanksgiving for his new duties as a Driver Ed instructor with his
maimed right hand encased in some kind of protective black polyurethane
glove or sheath, resulting in the student sobriquet ‘Dr. No’- 
throughout the early 1970s. Everyone seemed to have incentive to
forget the whole thing. A Voc Ed hard boy who would serve in the
Plaine des Joncs region of Indochina twenty months later was the
only one with a clear conscious memory of Stecyk and Ingle’s thumb
that one day, and this when a fat-body draftee who'd almost flunked
Basic and been the object of a savage blanket party had taken a squad
that had lost its corporal and regrouped them and brought them