

What Do You Tell Them Up Front?

For some tests, you won’t tell the players anything at all—you’ll let the game §}
for itself, particularly if you want to see if they can figure it out by themselves. For
the majority of playtests, you will need to tell players something to get them stay.

Use extreme caution when you do so—a few misplaced words right before play
can spoil the entire test. If, for example, you tell players that their goal is to defeat 1
evil Chronos, some players might start looking for him right away and, in doing,
miss out on important details they would have found if you hadn’t said that. For th
reason, you should take careful note of what you say to testers at the beginning,
case it has unexpected consequences. It can be a good idea to write it down ahead
time, so you can be sure you have prepped all the testers the same way.

Of course, you may find, over the course of several tests, a need to change your
introductory speech to clarify certain things. And here is one of the great side lh
benefits of playtesting. When you run multiple playtest sessions in sequence, you '
find yourself gradually tuning the instructions you give to the players, trim MI
a word here, and adding a phrase there, until you have a speech that is very ¢h
and very efficient. Write this down! This speech can become the foundation of an
in-game tutorial. Many game tutorials are terrible—the ones created by this me
are likely to have an aura of excellence about them. Having an in-game tutorial that
really makes players feel welcome and cared for is a great first impression for ye
game to make.

Where Do You Look?

Most people who attend a playtest tend to look where the player looks. If it I
videogame, this means at the screen. This makes sense, because this way you
what the player sees. But it isn’t where I look. I spend most of my time during
playtest looking at the players’ faces. Sure, I steal quick glances at the screen I
context, but mostly, I watch faces, because I don’t just want to see what the play
are doing, but how they feel when they are doing it. Their facial expressions provide a
wealth of data about the game that will never come out in postgame interview:
survey questions.

I learned to do this when I was a street performer. When you do street shows, I
only money you get is what you collect by passing the hat at the end. So, if you w
to have dinner that night, it becomes crucial to ensure the crowd you've Sear
up stays entertained. With practice, I soon found I could “read” the emotions «
crowd quickly and would tune my performance appropriately—stretching out ji
they enjoyed and moving quickly through parts that bored them. I was quite
surprised, when I started making videogames, to find myself reading the emotion
the players as they played and determining how the game should change to impr
the quality of the players’ emotional experiences. This is something that we are
equipped to do—it just has to be practiced.

PLAYTEST QUESTION THE FIFTH: HOW?

Of course, it would be best if our eyes could be everywhere at once: on the game,
on the players’ faces, and even on their hands, to see if they are using the controls
as we would expect. And with modern video technology, you can see it all! Getting
« few different cameras set up to feed to a single split-screen image can be a greal
way to record the game, face, and hands at the same time, so you can go back later
and see how all three of these things interrelate.

What Other Data Should You Collect During Play?

Watching with your own eyes and recording video of a play session can give you
lot of useful information, but there is other information you can gather as well,
With a little planning, you can find ways to keep logs of important game events
(luring each play session. If your game is digital, you can log all this automatically,
but if your game is not, you can just make careful notes when these important
events occur. What constitutes an “important event” will vary from game to game
of course. Here are some examples of data you might want to collect:

¢ How long did players spend in the character creator?
* How many hits did it take to defeat the villain?
« What was the average player score?

¢ Which weapons were used the most?

The more your game can collect these data automatically, the more useful the
(lata will be to you. In the past few years, it has become a necessity for anyone cre
dling an MMO or free to play game to have a rigorous system of analytics in place
accompanied by a content management system so that a continuous system of tui:
ing and testing can be taking place in perpetuity. This new kind of “quantitative
design” has its dangers—it can lead to dull designs and fear of trusting your own
instincts as a designer, but if you can overcome that, it is a subtle art that gives you
ew opportunities to understand player behavior.

Will I Disturb the Players Midgame?

This is a delicate question. When you disturb players midgame, perhaps to asl
(hem a question about what they are doing, you run the risk of interfering with
their natural play patterns. On the other hand, asking the right question at the right
foment may give you an insight you would not have had any other way. You might

_ aigue that it is best to just make a note of the question you have in mind and ask

ihe player about it when the play session is over. But by that time, the player is in a
different state of mind and may have no recollection of what you are talking about,
ll is a difficult trade-off. Most designers seem to favor only interrupting when the
player is doing something truly surprising that the designer does not understand,