
Behind him the Wheel softly, mutely turned, his brows
soaked, and Time, an ancient python, opened its mouth
ind spewed all it had swallowed till they gleamed once more.
Odysseus shook with joy—he had not lost one drop
of memory, and rejoiced in all his myriad heads
that glittered in long rows, snow-white, jet-black, or gray.

An old man, white with years, stood in the sun, thick-boned,
and a mature man that scaled castles and clasped women,
or plundered sea-lanes by himself in rotting hulls;
on a high threshing floor a youth hurled a stone quoit,
his mind a rosebud still, with savage virgin leaves
as yet unfurled, and held his famous voyages
and his far-distant future deeds in leaves immured.
Still further back, the lone man watched his body fling
small boats upon the waves, in shape of a lone child
whose spirit like a fearless captain rode them all.

‘Then, as a suckling child, he seized his mother’s breast,
bit its rose nipple deeply with a ruthless greed,
and as she laughed and wept, she felt this son of hers
would one day seize life’s holy breasts and suck them dry.
‘The suffering man could trace himself no further back:
within his parents’ bodies he had seethed like fever,
strolled in his father’s loins past the betrothed one’s door,
and as his virgin mother stooped with trembling fear,
she felt her son’s feet kicking in her untouched womb.
His mother by her window sewed her bridal clothes,
and when she stooped, her locks fell on her working hands
as her swift fingers flew and the embroideries rose
from her small heart and spread and soared until they wrapped
her secret dreams with yellow and with crimson wool.
She stitched blue seas and ships and oars, black dwarfish men,
and her tall son, their captain, zoned with a red belt,
till her young maiden mind like water poured and flowed.
Thousands of years before all parents saw the sun,
he’d flashed like foam on water or like flame in caves,
or twined about a plane tree like a cunning snake.
He'd learned with patient stubbornness, with his great Mothers,
Silence and Earth and Sea, how he might mount at last
on loam one day in a man’s form and live his life.
“Brothers, together now, let each one gird his arms,”
cried Death’s antagonist to all his myriad forms;

