
Who loves the more, the more endures, so much the more is comfortless; 
for Love in the end his lover slays. Then has he joy, when
fortune smiles on love.

What mean these complaints? That love is an evil that is
worth enduring, especially if there is some chance of its finding
its due reward; but, finally, it is an evil. The most pleasing of
evils, of all evils the most beneficent, an evil that makes the sufferer
superior to those who never feel it, but still an evil; it is the wellknown 
“mal d’amour” dear to the sentimental romances of all
times. It is an evil because it makes one suffer, and one suffers
because it is not always rewarded. Therefore, it is Said, since it
is“still cherished, it must needs be disinterested. Perhaps; but
first of all it is so only up to a certain point. When hope vanishes
for good and all, then Thibaut begins to cast about to rid himself
of this so beneficent evil:

Could I be quit of it, *twere more to me than to be King of France.

Never do we find St. Bernard seeking to disembarrass himself
of the love of God. Nor is this merely a matter of chance but
touches the root of the whole question, for here we may clearly
perceive that the two loves are of opposed natures. Courtly love,
let us say, is an evil because it may well have to go without its
reward.?38 Take this in its most immediate sense, and understand that
even in a purely sentimental way it may very possibly
not be returned—for sentiment can exist without the rest and
the rest without sentiment—then that is enough to set up a radical
distinction between courtly and mystical love, to set them in
opposition to each other as human love to divine. Here we have
precisely the suffering that Bernard would avoid, and from which
he would help us to free ourselves. Men suffer because the love
and are not loved_in return; love therefore God and you will
never know what it is to feel an unrequited love: for—let Us
viewer forget it—God has loved us first: ipse prior dilexit nos!
Such is the true love, not the desolate plaint of a soul that
languishes in solitude, but the joy of two wills knowing themselves 
united in intention and desire. For that love indeed is
never disappointed, and Thibaut knew it well when he wrote
in a weary moment:



Now keep me, God, from love and loving
Save only There where man must needs adore
And cannot want for great reward.

In these three lines are contained the principles of Cistercian
love, but they are also a denial of courtly love and an affirmation
 of its fundamental vanity. If there is filiation from St.
Bernard in the poetry of the Trouvéres it amounts to no more
than that: he inspired them perhaps with a few fleeting impulses
to renounce it.

But let us go further: we should still be but skimming the
surface of the problem were we content to say no more than that
divine love always brings with it its “grant soudee”, its great
reward. The very nature of love is here involved. Is an unrequited
love even conceivable? St. Bernard and all the Christian
mystics answer, no. Love belongs to the order of friendship,
and friendship essentially implies mutual good-will; we are not
friends with anyone who is not our friend, we can only desire
his friendship, and that is not the same thing as possessing it.
Love is in the same case. What the courtly poets call by this
name is merely desire in the eyes of the Christian mystics. To
transpose what the poets say into mystical terms we should have