

you a very limited range of basic actions. The player generally knows every act
they can possibly attempt. In text adventures, the complete set of basic action at
was unclear, and discovering them was part of the game. Very often, the solution
to a tricky puzzle was thinking to type an unusual verb, like “spin the fish” 0}
“tickle the monkey.” While this was all very creative, it was also often frustrating
—for every one of the hundreds of verbs a game supported, there were thousands
it did not. As a result, players did not really have the “complete freedom
that text adventure interfaces pretended to give them. It is possible that 
this frustration, more than anything else, caused text adventures to fall from favor.
Your choice of actions significantly defines your game structure, so let’s 

Mechanic 5: Rules

The rules are really the most fundamental mechanic. They define the space, the
timing, the objects, the actions, the consequences of the actions, the constraints on
the actions, and the goals. In other words, they make possible all the mechanics we
have seen so far and add the crucial thing that makes a game a game—goals.
encounter, so let’s consider each.



Parlett’s Rule Analysis

Navid Parlett, game historian, did a very good job of analyzing the different kinds
0! rules that are involved with gameplay, as shown in this diagram.

This shows the relationships between all the kinds of rules we are likely to encounter

1. Operational rules: These are the easiest to understand. These are basically
“What the players do to play the game.” When players understand the opera
tional rules, they can play a game.

2. Foundational rules: The foundational rules are the underlying formal structure
of the game. The operational rules might say “The player should roll a six-sided
die, and collect that many power chips.” The foundational rules would be more
abstract: “The player’s power value is increased by a random number from
I to 6.” Foundational rules are a mathematical representation of game state and
how and when it changes. Boards, dice, chips, health meters, etc., are all just
operational ways of keeping track of the foundational game state. As Parlett's
diagram shows, foundational rules inform operational rules. There is not yel
any standard notation for representing these rules, and there is some question
about whether a complete notation is even possible. In real life, game designers
learn to see the foundational rules on an as-needed basis, but seldom do they
have any need to formally document the entire set of foundational rules in a
completely abstract way.