

 like Horace’s painter, and comfortably survey his
work from a distance (for this would require reading ~
the entire novel one more time), he is much more familiar 
than a painter is with the individual details—the
trees rather than the forest, the single moments 
represented by the objects. A painting is a form of mimesis:
it provides us with a representation of reality. When we
gaze at a painting, we sense not only the world that the
painting belongs to, but also what Heidegger felt when
he looked at Van Gogh’s masterpiece A Pair of Shoes:
the thingness of the painting, its status as an object. 

For the painting has brought us face to face with a 
representation of the world and the things in it. In a novel,
however, we can encounter this world and these things
only by converting the writer’s descriptions into pictures 
in our imagination. The Bible declares, “In the
beginning was the Word.” The art of the novel might
say, “In the beginning there seems to be the picture, but
it must be told in words.” And ironically, the entire 
history of painting—especially premodern painting,
which was mostly illustrative—says, “In the beginning
was the word, but it must be told in pictures.”

The power and immediacy of images, as opposed to
words, explains the secret feelings of inferiority, the
deep-seated envy, that novelistt—who have an intuitive

understanding of the situation—feel toward painters,

Words, Pictures, Objects 115

But the novelist is not simply someone who wants to
become a painter; rather, the novelist seeks the ability
to paint with words and descriptions. The novelist feels
two parallel obligations: on the one hand, to identify
and see the world through the eyes of his protagonists,
and, on the other, to describe things with words. Henry
James may have called the narrator of The Golden Bowl
a “painter” for keeping a distance from the action—but
to me, the precise opposite is true. The novelist can 
describe things in the manner of a painter because he is
just as interested in the things that surround his characters 
as he is in the characters themselves, and because
he is not outside the world of the novel, but completely
immersed in it. The image juste that the novelist must
find, prior to the Flaubertian mot juste, can be discovered 
only when the writer completely enters the landscape, the events, 
and the world of the novel. 

This is also the only way in which the novelist can show the
compassion he must feel toward the people he writes
about. So we must conclude: the descriptions of things
in a novel are (or should be) the outcome and expression 
of compassion felt for the characters.

Since a part of my identity has its roots in an Islamic
culture that does not get on very well with the art of
figurative depiction, I will present one or two examples
from my own life. In the Istanbul of my childhood, de-