

There is no error more common than that of thinking that those
who are the causes or occasions of great tragedies share in ©
the feelings suitable to the tragic mood: no error more fatal
than expecting it of them, The martyr in his ‘shirt of flame’*
may be looking on the face of God, but to him who is piling
the faggots or loosening the logs for the blast the whole scene
is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the butcher, or
the felling of a tree to the charcoal-burner in the forest, or
the fall of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass
with a scythe. Great passions are for the great of soul, and
great events can be seen only by those who are on a level
with them.

I know of nothing in all Drama more incomparable from
the point of view of Art, or more suggestive in its subtlety
of observation, than Shakespeare’s drawing of Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern. They are Hamlet’s college friends. They
have been his companions. They bring with them memories
of pleasant days together, At the moment when they come
across him in the play he is staggering under the weight of
a burden intolerable to one of his temperament. The dead
have come armed out of the grave to impose on him a
mission at once too great and too mean for him. He is a
dreamer, and he is called upon to act. He has the nature
of the poet and he is asked to grapple with the common
complexities of cause and effect, with life in its practical
realization, of which he knows nothing, not with life in
its ideal essence, of which he knows much. He has no
conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.

Brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of 9
his purpose, the dagger of his will,” but to Hamlet madness
is a mere mask for the I hiding of weakness. In the making of
mows and jests he sees a chance of delay. He keeps playing
with action, as an artist plays with a theory. He makes
himself the spy of his Proper actions, and listening to his own
words knows them to be but ‘words, words, words’. Instead
of trying to be the hero of his own history, he seeks to be the
spectator of his own tragedy. He disbelieves in everything,
including himself, and yet his doubt helps him not, as it
comes not from scepticism but from a divided will.



Of all this, Guildenstern and Rosencrantz realize nothing.
They bow and smirk and smile, and what the one says the
other echoes with sicklier iteration. When at last, by means
of the play within the play and the puppets in their dalliance,
Hamlet ‘catches the conscience’ of the King, and drives the
wretched man in terror from his throne, Guildenstern and
Rosencrantz see no more in his conduct than a rather
painful breach of court-etiquette. That is as far as they
can attain to in ‘the contemplation of the spectacle of life
with appropriate emotions’.* They are close to his very secret
and know nothing of it. Nor would there be any use in telling
them. They are the little cups than can hold so much and no
more. 

Towards the close it is suggested that, caught in a
cunning spring set for another, they have met, or may meet
with a violent and sudden death. But a tragic ending of this
kind, though touched by Hamlet’s humour with something
of the surprise and justice of comedy, is really not for such
as they. They never die. Horatio who, in order to ‘report
Hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied’,

Absents him from felicity a while
And in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,
dies, though not before an audience, and leaves no brother.
But Guildenstern and Rosencrantz are as immortal as
Angelo and Tartuffe,” and should rank with them. They
are what modern life has contributed to the antique ideal
of friendship. He who writes a new De Amicitia must find a
niche for them and praise them in Tusculan prose.” They are
types fixed for all time. To censure them would show a lack
of appreciation. They are merely out of their sphere: that is
all. In sublimity of soul there is no contagion. High thoughts
and high emotions are by their very existence isolated. What
Ophelia herself could not understand was not to be realised
by “Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz’, by ‘Rosencrantz
and gentle Guildenstern’. Of course I do not propose to
compare you. There is a wide difference between you. What
with them was chance, with you was choice. Deliberately
and by me uninvited you thrust yourself into my sphere,
usurped there a place for which you had neither right nor