
608 The Scapegoat

in person for a whole year. According to the old Franciscan
monk Sahagun, our best authority on the Aztec religion, the
sacrifice of the human god fell at Easter or a few days later, so
that, if he is right, it would correspond in date as well as in
character to the Christian festival of the death and resurrection
of the Redeemer. More exactly he tells us that the sacrifice took
place on the first day of the fifth Aztec month, which according
to him began on the twenty-third or twenty-seventh day of
April.

At this festival the great god died in the person of one human
representative and came to life again in the person of another,
who was destined to enjoy the fatal honour of divinity for a year
and to perish, like all his predecessors, at the end of it. The
young man singled out for this high dignity was earefully
chosen from among the captives on the ground of his personal
beauty. He had to be of unblemished body, slim as a reed and
straight as a pillar, neither too tall nor too short. If through high
living he grew too fat, he was obliged to reduce himself by
drinking salt water. And in order that he might behave in ‘his
lofty station with becoming grace and dignity he was carefully
trained to comport himself like a gentleman of the first quality,
to speak correctly and elegantly, to play the flute, to smoke
cigars and to snuff at flowers with a dandified air. He was
honourably lodged in the temple where the nobles waited on
him and paid him homage, bringing him meat and serving like
a prince. The king himself saw to it that he was apparelled in
gorgeous attire, ‘for already he esteemed him as a god’. Eagle
down was gummed to his head and white cock’s feathers were
stuck in his hair, which drooped to his girdle. A wreath of
flowers like roasted maize crowned his brows, and a garland of
the same flowers passed over his shoulders and under his
arm-pits. Golden ornaments hung from his nose, golden armlets
adorned his arms, golden bells jingled on his legs at every step
he took; earrings of turquoise dangled from his ears, bracelets
of turquoise bedecked his wrists; necklaces of shells encircled
his neck and depended on his breast; he wore a mantle of
network, and round his middle a rich waist-cloth. When this
bejewelled exquisite lounged through the streets playing on his
flute, puffing at a cigar, and smelling at a nosegay, the people
whom he met threw themselves on the earth before him and
prayed to him with sighs and tears, taking up the dust in their
hands and putting it in their mouths in token of the deepest
Humiliation and subjection. Women came forth with children in
(heir arms and presented them to him, saluting him as a god.
Vor ‘he passed for our Lord God; the people acknowledged him
i# the Lord’. All who thus worshipped him on his passage he
gravely and courteously. Lest he should flee, he was
everywhere attended by a guard of eight pages in the royal
livery, four of them with shaven crowns like the palace-slaves,
and four of them with the flowing locks of warriors; and if he 4€c
vontrived to escape, the_captain of the guard had to take his in
fluce as the representative of the god and to die in his stead.
Twenty days > his costume was changed,
ind four damsels, delicately nurtured and bearing the names of
four goddesses—the Goddess of Flowers, the Goddess of the
Young Maize, the Goddess ‘Our Mother among the Water’, and
the Goddess of Salt—were given him to be his brides, and with
them he consorted. During the last five days divine honours
were showered on the destined victim. The king remained in
his palace while the whole court went after the human god.
Solemn banquets and dances followed each other in regular
succession and at appointed places. On the last day the young
man, attended by his wives and pages, embarked in a canoe
covered with a royal canopy and was ferried across the lake to
4 spot where a little hill rose from the edge of the water. It was
walled the Mountain of Parting, because here his wives bade him
a last farewell. Then, accompanied only by his pages, he
repaired to a small and lonely temple by the wayside. Like the
Mexican temples in general, it was built in the form of a
pyramid; and as the young man ascended the stairs he broke at
every step one of the flutes on which he had played in the days
of his glory. On reaching the summit he was seized and held
(lown by the priests on his back upon a block of stone, while
one of them cut open his breast, thrust his hand into the
wound, and wrenching out his heart held it up in sacrifice to
the sun. The body of the dead god was not, like the bodies of
common victims, sent rolling down the steps of the temple, but
was carried down to the foot, where the head was cut off and
pitted on a pike. Such was the regular end of the man who
personated the greatest god of the Mexican pantheon.
