

Fits sells

To avoid them, he went down a short dead-end street that
launched off theirs. No houses had ever been built on this street,
Wt) it was not plowed. But the snow was hard, and easy to walk on.

He didn’t notice how easy it was to walk on until he realized that
he had gone beyond the end of the street and up a slope, which
was not a slope of the land at all, but a drift of snow. The drift
neatly covered the fence that usually separated the street from the
field. He had walked over the fence without knowing what he was
doing. The snow was that hard.

He walked here and there, testing. The crust took his weight
without a whisper or a crack. It was the same everywhere. You
could walk over the snowy fields as if you were walking on cement.
(This morning, looking at the snow, hadn’t he thought of marble?)
But this paving was not flat. It rose and dipped in a way that had
hot much to do with the contours of the ground underneath. The
snow created its own landscape, which was sweeping, in a grand _
and arbitrary style. 

Instead of walking around on the plowed streets of town, he
could walk over the fields. He could cut across to the diner on the
highway, which stayed open until midnight. He would have a cup
of coffee there, turn around, and walk home.

One night, about six months before Robert married Peg, he and
Lee were sitting drinking in his apartment. They were having an
argument about whether it was permissible, or sickening, to have
your family initial on your silverware. All of a sudden, the argument
split open—Robert couldn’t remember how, but it split open, and
they found themselves saying the cruellest things to each other that
they could imagine. Their voices changed from the raised pitch and
speed of argument, and they spoke quietly with a subtle loathing.

“You always rnake me think of a dog,” Lee said. “You always
make me think of one of those dogs that push up on people and
paw them, with their big disgusting tongues hanging out. You’re
so eager. All your friendliness and eagerness—that’s really aggression.
I’m not the only one who thinks this about you. A lot of
people avoid you. They can’t stand you. You'd be surprised. You