

When I began this project, I envisioned this to be a book
that would help eliminate the struggles of learning to play a
musical instrument. However, the further into the writing
process I got, the more I realized that I was writing about my
outlook on processing life, not just on playing an instrument or
learning a golf swing. I realized that I was using what I had
learned in the very process of writing the book. I observed my
perspective on how I maintained my steady writing effort day to
day. I saw its presence in the effort of trying to understand
exactly what it was that I had learned and how to put that into
words. I saw how I was able to run a very successful business
and to be there for my young daughters. One day I noticed that I
was feeling frustrated and somewhat irritated while I was taking
care of my daughters. I was having all these ideas for this book
but they were going to have to wait to be written down because
my children needed my attention. I noticed that I had become
the chariot rider who did not have control of the reins. I was
allowing my mind to go off the path and work on the book
instead of staying on the path and enjoying the time with my
kids. When I realized this, I pulled in the reins, and let the book
go until my next scheduled writing session. The stress
disappeared immediately and I saw the fun I was missing by not
being in the present moment with my daughters.

At its inception, I would not have been able to write
“this” version of “The Practicing Mind” even if someone had
sat me down and said, “I will pay your bills and look after your
family, you just write.” It took the writing process and
observing myself going through the day to learn that.

I now realize that my approach toward moving through
life began to change in my early twenties. Maybe this sounds
familiar to you. Up until then I had a long list of interests that I
had pursued with a lot of enthusiasm, but for which I had lost
steam and energy relatively quickly. My biggest asset was that
I was aware of the fact that I seemed to follow a particular
pattern with regard to any new endeavor. First I would pick the
particular activity, say exercising. Then I would really get
involved in it by joining a gym and buying the proper clothes,
etc. Then I would start the activity with a commitment to be
steadfast, and persevere with my effort. After a few sessions,
my initial enthusiasm would start to taper off and I would have
trouble maintaining my interest and discipline. From that point,
it would become harder and harder to continue with the practice
of keeping up the exercising routine, and I would begin to make
excuses to myself for skipping a session with promises like, “
will make it up on the next session or add one in the morning
before work during the week.” This was all folly, though,
because I wouldn't follow through with these commitments
either, and I would become more and more comfortable with
letting things slide until I had completely gotten away from my
original goals. There was also this nagging sense that I had let _
myself down, plus a feeling of not really being in control of my
destiny because I wasn’t completing something that I had made
a decision to do. Eventually, in this cycle I would get to the
point where I had lost all interest in the particular endeavor, and
I would begin the search for the next thing that was going to fill
the void in me, starting the whole process over again. But I was
aware of this tendency and I would quietly observe myself
participating in this routine with one thing after another.

Three things were happening at this point in my life that
would prove to be the beginning of a major shift in perspective
and awareness for me. First, I had begun taking piano lessons
again from a teacher who was not only one of the best players in
the area, but was only several years older than myself. Taking
lessons as an adult proved to have a whole new set of
advantages and disadvantages over studying as a child. We will
20 into these in a future chapter. Second, while in college, I had
begun independently studying Eastern philosophies. My study
at this point was fairly broad, not focusing on any one
philosophy in particular, and was more a part of a self- imposed
“religions and philosophies of the world” course. This would
spark a contemplative process in me that, over the next 20
years, would forever change my understanding of the