

the heavy keys that open and close our destiny;
Rocky, you'll scour the mountains with the wild game hunters
and track those shining bulls used in their wanton games.
Orpheus, dream-taken poet, you'll sit at the king’s feet
and jest with him like a court’s fool to calm his heart,
but you, my piper, with sweet flutes and magic tunes
shall lead him far astray and snare him in black pits.

Kentaur, you'll plunge to the dark vaults, as you like best,
and there divert the savage slavehands night and day,
feeding their pallid hearts so that the world won’t vanish;
it pleases me to use your roistering good heart
like kindling wood for the destruction of all mankind.
You, Captain Clam, will stay in port and make new friends;
you'll find your task at first most sweet, and welcome, too,
but it may burst about you filled with death at last
and then it may be difficult, friend, to save your head.”

Captain Clam laughed and seized the white top of his skull:
“T’ve only one head on this desolate earth. It’s yours!”
The harsh man-killer smiled and grabbed his friend’s white head
as though he thought to set up occupation there,
but sighed and rose, and all his wolf-pack leapt at once
till their small Mother Earth creaked to contain them all.
Laughing, they started then to share the world between them:

“My share,” yelled Captain Clam, “will be the sea for wife;
our two beasts of the wood will share earth fifty-fifty,
the guzzler here will take the wine casks for his share,
and our unlaughing smith shall set his forge on fire
and melt down golden gods and bracelets to sharp swords!”
The piper found an opening and piped up once more:
“Brothers, you've shared the world between you. Health and joy!
But what about my cut? Am I the hairless fool?
And yet, of all of you, it’s I who gain the most,
for with no wretched vineyards, farms, or business cares
I keep my head unhooked and play with all the world.
I sit enthroned on freedom’s stone in a far corner,
and as I watch you all pass by, weighed down with cares,
I laugh, stretch my mind taut and shoot my darting words
straight to the mark, all claws and light, until you faint
and enter like pale shades into my lofty song;
this is my mind’s great share, I want no other cut!”
The archer laughed and finally opened the tavern door:
“Good going, piper, you've grabbed the lion’s share in truth!
But, friends, it’s I who must complain, for where’s my share?
Where do I best fit in so that my mind won’t choke?
The sea won't hold me, honest earth now spews me forth,
and the vast sky is much too empty for man’s spirit.”
Nocky wrung his wine-soaked beard and spoke with pluck:
il man, you know the world can’t hold you now,

