


to lay any hold, and no one to lay any hold on anything. This
has been discovered through clear awareness of everything that
seemed to offer a solution or to ‘constitute a reliable reality,
through the intuitive wisdom called prajna, which sees into the
relational character of everything. With the “eye of prajna” the
human situation is seen for what it is~a quenching of thirst with
salt water, a pursuit of goals which simply require the pursuit of
other goals, a clutching of objects which the swift course of time
renders as insubstantial as mist. The very one who pursues, who
sees and knows and desires, the inner subject, has his existence
only in relation to the ephemeral objects of his pursuit. He sees
that his grasp upon the world is his strangle-hold about his own
neck, the hold which is depriving him of the very life he so longs
to attain. And there is no way out, no way of letting go, which he
can take by effort, by a decision of the will. . . . But who is 
that wants to get out?

There comes a moment when this consciousness of the inescapable trap 
in which we are at once the trapper and the
trapped reaches a breaking point. One might almost say that it
“matures” or “ripens,” and suddenly there is what the Lankavatara 
Sutra calls a “turning about in the deepest seat of consciousness.” 
In this moment all sense of constraint drops away,
and the cocoon which the silkworm spun around himself opens
to let him go forth winged as a moth. The peculiar anxiety which
Kierkegaard has rightly seen to lie at the very roots of the
ordinary man’s soul is no longer there. Contrivances, ideals,
ambitions, and self-propitiations are no longer necessary, since
it is now possible to live spontaneously without trying to be
spontaneous. Indeed, there is no alternative, since it is now seen
that there never was any self to bring the self under its control.

Reduced to the bare essentials, such is the inner process which
the Sunyavada is trying to set in motion with its philosophy of
total negation. Thus the greater part of Nagarjuna’s work was a
carefully logical and systematic refutation of every philosoph-

{eal position to be found in the India of his time.® Granting that
its object is an inner experience, Western students have always
had difficulty in understanding how such a purely negative point
of view could have any creative consequences. It must therefore
be repeated that the negations apply, not to reality itself, but to
‘pur ideas of reality. The positive and creative content of the
Sunyavada is not in the philosophy itself, but in the new vision
of reality which is revealed when its work is done, and Nagarjuna
‘does not spoil this vision by trying to describe it.

The Mahayana does, however, have another term for reality
which is perhaps yather more indicative than sunya, the void, This
4s the word tathata, which we may translate as “suchness,” “thusness,” 
or “thatness.” Similarly, the Buddhas are called Tathagatas—
they who go, or come, “thus.” The Sanskrit word tat (our “that” )
{g probably based on a child’s first efforts at speech, when it
points at something and says, “Ta” or “Da.” Fathers flatter themselves 
by imagining that the c ild is calling them by name-
“Dada” or “Daddy.” But perhaps the child is just expressing its
recognition of the world, and saying “That!” When we say just
That” or “Thus,” we are pointing to the realm of nonverbal
‘experience, to reality as we perceive it directly, for we are trying
‘to indicate what we see or feel rather than what we think or say.
Wathata therefore indicates the world just as it is, unscreened and.
undivided by the symbols and definitions of thought. It points to
the concrete and actual as distinct from the abstract and conceptual. 
A Buddha is a Tathagata, a “thus-goer,” because he is
awakened to this primary, nonconceptual world which no words
can convey, and does not confuse it with such ideas as being or
non-being, good or bad, past or future, here or there, moving or

*The reader who is interested in exploring Nagarjuna’s philosophy more
deeply should refer to the magnificent work of Professor T. R. V. Murti,
Whe Central Philosophy of Bud: hism. (See Bibliography.) Unhappily, there
fre now available only fragmentary translations of Nagarjuna’s writings in
Inglish, unless he was indeed the author of the Prajna-paramita literature,
ot which see Conze (2, 3).