

the impersonal and uncollective share of ourselves; hence, ¥
shall not find in these texts anything dealing with a fo
person, i.e., with a history, a life, a character; but we shall
not find here any mirror of humanity. In other words, tI
substance of this writing is not experience (experience, “what hi
been lived,” is banal—it is precisely what the writer must combat
but it is also not reason (a general category adopted und
various pretexts by all ready-made literatures); this famous
conflict, so apparently irreducible in some people’s eyes that
keeps them from writing, is one whose terms F.B. rejects, an
it is by thig dynocent rejection that he is likely to fulfill the utopian
of a particular language. ]This action has a great critical 
consequence: though F.B.’s texts can be described as being, nothin
in the world can keep them from becoming: achieved in writing
the particular struggles here with the work which every social
being moral, demands of the one who writes.

7. Technique

is the narrow space in which the author writes. This cannot be
done without a technique, which is not necessarily an apprenticeship, 
but according to Aristotle’s definition, the faculty of
producing that which can be or not be. The goal of this technique
is to describe a world chosen, not as a desirable world, but as
the desirable itself; desire is here not the attribute of a creation
which preexists it, it is immediately a substance; in other words,
again, the author does not discover (by the action of a privileged
subjectivity) that the world is desirable, he determines it desirable;
 hence, it is the time of judgment, psychological time, which
is eluded here: particular, but not individual, the author does
not recount what he sees, what he feels, he does not reel off the
precious epithets he has the fortune of finding, he does not act
wi a psychologist who uses a felicitous language in order to
erumerate the original attributes of his vision, rather he acts
immediately as a writer; he does not make bodies desirable, he
iilikes desire corporeal, inverting substance and attribute by the
very paradox of writing: everything is shifted to objects, in
order to express not what they are (what are they?) but the
essence of the desire which constitutes them, exactly as 
lumiflescence constitutes phosphorus; in F.B.'s texts, there is never
any undesirable object. Thus, the author creates a vast metonymy
of desire: a contagious writing which transfers to its reader the
very desire out of which it has formed things.

8. Signum facere

The old rhetoric distinguished disposition from elocution.
 Disposition (taxis) accounts for the work’s major units, its general
arrangement, its “development”; elocution (lexis) accounted for
the figures, the turns of speech, what we should call le Unt
writing [écriture], i.e., a class (and not an epitome) of details.
F'.B.’s texts are fully (at least for the moment) texts of elocution.
The unit of elocution has a very ancient name: It 1s the song.
The song is not a euphony or a quality of images; according ee
the Orphic myth, it is a way of keeping the world under one s
language. What sings here is not directly the words, it is that
“second writing, that mental writing which forms itself and
advances between the things and the words—a kind of anterior
song (as Baudelaire speaks of a vie antérieure, a previous existence). Vico at one point mentions certain universals of the imag.
ination: that is the space where F.B. forms a particular wEning,
without tradition and without provocation; neither “noble” nor
“natural,” this writing eludes all the models without ever assuming the heavy signaletics of originality. Whence, perhaps, its
naked friendliness, severed from any humanism. To read F.B.
is constantly to form in oneseif certain adjectives: fresh, simple,
silky, light, sensitive, accurate, intelligent, desirable, strong, rich