Paradoxical Pynchon / 143

“the Zone” asserting his independence of plots and conspiracies?
Then the first person he meets there will spontaneously offer him 
information on “the one rocket out of 6000” that he seeks (p. 292). Death by
bombardment is surely the most random and pointless of fates; but what
i voices from the dead say that it all makes sense? Is the world watched
over by a spiritual divinity? Or are the conventional restraints on man’s
bestiality wholly arbitrary? Rhetorically, the novel can both be
and coprophilia. To every question, the action of Gravity’s Rainbow offers
two plausible answers, each a contradiction of the other.

The structure of the novel, although enormously elaborate, may be 
reduced to two simple opposite movements: the assembly of the Rocket, Fema
and the disassembly of Slothrop. The more he (and we) learn
about the Rocket, the less of Slothrop remains as a character, until there
are left only a “few who can still see Slothrop as any sort of integral
creature any more” (p. 740). The Rocket, by contrast, first appears in the
novel in dispersed fragments, and is only gradually reassembled:

The novel, that is, seeks to produce the specific esthetic effect which I sh
call the Power of Paradox: the peculiar suspension of the intellectual 4
emotional faculties between two equally plausible but mutually exclusive
modes of perception or belief. The novel’s self-consciousness reinforces
its paradoxical effect.

We are already familiar with paradox as an esthetic power—as the “
nal cause,” the “intended effect”—of works of art in other media, I
drawing, for example, paradox is sought as the final power in much ¢
the work of M.C. Escher. In the folk art of verbal humor, the power
paradox underlies many jokes, especially puns. Paradox is rarer as
intended effect of literature since it is primarily a local effect, not easily
sustained without becoming tedious.

Poems, though, are often genetcally paradoxical; some of John Donne’s, 
for example, in M.H. Abrams’ account, are “paradoxical in the overall 
structure as well as in the compponent statements.”! John Lyly’s Euphues (1579) 
is an early example of book-length paradox, a string of varied and elaborate 
antitheses balanced between wisdom and wit. Paradox has consistently interested 
philosophers, as the titles of Either/Or and Beyond Good and Evil suggest.

Gravity’s Rainbow creates its own paradoxical effect by offering
reader two antithetical perspectives on everything that happens in its
pages. Everything in it can be seen either as related causally, or as related
casually: the novel provides evidence for both conclusions. If events in
Gravity’s Rainbow are related causally, then a massive conspiracy envelopes 
Tyrone Slothrop and the other characters. This is confirmed by the
novel. If events are related casually, however, then the apparent links are
no more than the characters’ (and reader’s) paranoid imaginings. This, —
too, is confirmed by the novel.

Slothrop’s amorous successes coincide point for point with the rocket
strikes in London: surely cause-and-effect, either Precognition or psy- —
chokinesis. But both patterns conform to a Poisson distribution: perfect —
randomness, each point ideally independent of any other. Where does
Slothrop see the most pervasive web of conspiracy surrounding him? In
a casino—hazard’s home. This is the essence of the paradoxical effect of
what happens in the novel: the insistence, in every episode, that everything 
is fixed; inseparable from the insistence, in those same episodes,
that everything is random. Does Slothrop escape into the anarchic chaos



Slothrop, until his own dispersal, collects the fragments of rocket ame
mation that ultimately coalesce in the twin rocket sagas of Blicero’s
Rocket No. 00000 and its repetition, Enzian’s No. oooor. The Schwarzkommando’s 
reconstruction of Rocket No. oooor from scattered debris
coincides with the reader’s reconstruction of Rocket No. 00000 from
scattered details. Just as the reader puts the whole story together, its hero
@ ically) falls apart. a



If ever the Antipointsman existed, Roger Mexico is the man. [... a the
domain of zero to one, not-something to something, Pointsman can only ed
sess the zero and the one. He cannot, like Mexico, survive anyplace in “s
tween. Like his master I.P. Pavlov before him, he imagines the cortex of ‘i
brain as a mosaic of tiny on/off elements. [ . . . J Each point is allowed only
the two states: waking or sleep. One or zero. [ . ] But to Mexico ere
the domain between zero and one—the middle Pointsman has excluded from

1. M.H. Abrams, A Glossary of. Literary Terms (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Ba aearatao—ie probabilities. (p. )

1957), 8.v. “Figurative language.” p. 37.