

one imagines one loves, in order to love a little less and]
even in order to detach oneself a little from one’s love, j
or at any rate to detach some of the crystals from one’s)
love. But if one is able to say such a thing to oneself,
must one not already love a little less? {
It is by such reasoning as this that X. in my book)
tries to detach himself from Z.—and, still more, tries to}
detach her from himself, j

Oct. 28th—People are always talking of the sudden!
crystallization of love. Its slow decrystallization, which]
I never hear talked of, is a psychological phenomenon’
which interests me far more. I consider that it can be
observed, after a longer or shorter period, in all love
marriages. ‘There will be no reason to fear this, indeed,
in Laura’s case (and so much the better) if she marries
Felix Douviers, as reason, and her family, and I myself!
advise her to do. Douviers is a thoroughly estimable
professor, with many excellent points, and very capable 
in his own line (I hear that he is greatly appreciated by
his pupils). In process of time and in the wear of dailt
life, Laura is sure to discover in him all the more virtues
for having had fewer illusions to begin with; when she
praises him, indeed, she seems to me really not to give
him his due. Douviers is worth more than she thinks.

What an admirable subject for a novel—the progressive 
and reciprocal decrystallization of a husband
and wife after fifteen or twenty years of married life. So
long as he loves and desires to be loved, the lover 
himself as he really is, and moreover he doeg
not see ae eee instead, an idol whom he deckg
out, a divinity whom he creates. 4

So I have warned Laura to be on her guard against
both herself and me. I have tried to persuade her that
our love could not bring either of us any lasting happi¢
ness. I hope I have more or less convinced her. y


Edouard shrugs his shoulders, slips the letter in between 
the leaves of his journal, shuts it up and replaces
it in his suit-case. He then takes a hundred-franc note
out of his pocket-book and puts that too in his suit-case.
‘This sum will be more than sufficient to last him till he
can fetch his suit-case from the cloak-room, where he
intends to deposit it on his arrival. The tiresome thing is
that it has got no key—or at any rate he has not got its
key. He always loses the keys of his suit-cases. Pooh! The
cloakroom attendants are too busy during the day-time
and never alone. He will fetch it out at about four
o'clock and then go to comfort and help Laura; he will
persuade her to come out to dinner with him.

Edouard dozes; insensibly his thoughts take another
direction. He wonders whether he would have guessed
merely by reading Laura’s letter that her hair was black.
Ile says to himself that novelists, by a too exact 
description of their characters, hinder the reader’s imagination
tither than help it, and that they ought to allow each
individual to picture their personages to himself according 
to his own fancy. He thinks of the novel which he is
plinning and which is to be like nothing else he has
ever written. He is not sure that The Counterfeiters is
i good title. He was wrong to have announced it beforehand. An absurd custom this of publishing the titles of
books in advance, in order to whet the reader’s appetite!
It whets nobody’s appetite and it ties one. He is not
sure either that the subject is a very good one. He is
continually thinking of it and has been thinking of it
lor a long time past; but he has not yet written a line
of it. On the other hand, he puts down his notes and
iellections in a little note-book. He takes this note-book
out of his suit-case and a fountain pen out of his pocket.
Ile writes:

I should like to strip the novel of every element that

locs not specifically belong to the novel. Just as photography
i the past freed painting from its concern for a certain sort

aLyqoI