

Do we have a Unique Selling Proposition (USP)?

the two important words here—“unique” and "proposition"

If you do have a definite benefit, then advertise
it. If you don’t, then do “branding-advertising”
instead (e.g., what most bottled water campaigns.
do). (See also The Brand and Branding, page 224.

Should we be using a logical argument
OR a mnemonic, to be remembered?

This continues from the last question. If you have:
a great USP, logic says you should use it. If you
don’t have a strong reason for buying your product,
you will probably want to do the branding using
a mnemonic (a device to aid memory). This can
be a gimmick, like “the Pepsi Challenge,” which in
turn created its own USP (Pepsi tastes better than
Coke). There are also smaller mnemonic devices
such as the Intel® Pentium® Processor jingle.

To put all this simply, you always have to decide
between:

* Brand share vs. market growth
* Trial vs. existing users
* USP vs. branding
* Logic vs. mnemonic

Note: the more clearly you can answer each binary question (based)
largely on how you interpret the product and market supposition),

as you like (right up to actually doing the ads).

Of course, advertising objectives and the associated
problem(s) that need to be solved are not exclusive’
to cans of soda and other consumer goods. The
same strategic thinking applies to anything that
may need advertising. For example, imagine the
client/product is a blood drive for the Red Cross.
The advertising objective = encourage more adults
to donate blood. The problem to solve is ultimately
the fact that not enough people give blood (and
that blood supplies are therefore too low). But
probe a little deeper and you will find other
problems associated with giving blood that the
advertising could solve, like: people’s general apathy
about saving lives, the time and hassle involved, :
the fear of needles, the fear of fainting, etc., etc.

Addressing and overturning one or more of these
concerns is the key to solving the advertising
objective, and therefore creating a successful ad
campaign, (For example, one student campaign
tackled needle phobia by ‘simply equating the actual
that we haven’t built the same fear around (e.g.,
(i mosquito bite, a rose thorn, a push pin, etc.)

O