

before the Flood to emulate this beautiful model in painting”
and sculpture. However, it is more than probable that they
too executed paintings and sculptures in every kind of style.
For later, about dred r the Flood, Belos,
son of the proud Nimrod, was responsible for the statue that
was subsequently used for idolatry; and again, his famous
daughter-in-law, Semiramis, queen of Babylon, when that
city was built included in its adornments not only various
kinds of animals, drawn and coloured from life, but also
effigies of herself and her husband, Ninus, besides bronze
statues of her father- and mother-in-law and the latter's
mother. We are told this by Diodorus, who anachronistically
calls them Jove, Juno, and Ops.! It may have been from these
statues that the Chaldeans learned how to fashion the images
of their own gods; because we are clearly told in Genesis how
a hundred and fifty years later Rachel stole-the idols of her
father Laban, when she fled from Mesopotamia with Jacob
her husband.

It was not only the Chaldeans who produced sculptures and
paintings. The Egyptians were also very proficient in those
arts, as was proved by the marvellous sepulchre of their
ancient king, Ozimandias, which is fully described by Diodorus. 
And there is another proof in the stern commandment
which Moses issued during the flight from Egypt, which
forbade the Jews under pain of death to make any images
whatsoever of God. When he came down from the mountain
, Moses found that his people had made the Golden Calf
and were solemnly adoring it; incensed at seeing divine worship 
offered to the image of a beast, he not only smashed it
and crushed it to powder but also, to punish that sin, he
ordered the Levites to kill many thousands of the wicked sons
of Israel for taking part in the idolatry. But it was the worship

iven to statues, not the making of them, which was wickedly
sinful; and we read in Exodus that the art of design and of
sculpture, in all kinds of metal as well as marble, was taught
by God to Besaleel, of the tribe of Judah, and to Ooliab, of
the tribe of Dan. They made the two golden cherubim Diodorus 
was Diodorus Siculus, a contemporary of Julius Caesar, 
who wrote a universal history in forty books, fifteen of which have survived intact.

candlesticks, and the veil, and the hems of the sacerdotal
vestments, and all the beautiful casts for the Tabernacle.
Th cir only motive was to persuade the people to contemplate
and adore them.

It was from the works seen before the Flood that men, in
their pride, discovered the way to make statues of those whose
fame they wanted to perpetuate. The Greeks assigned a
different origin to sculpture, arguing, as Diodorus says, that
the first statues were made by the Ethiopians, and that the
ligyptians learned from the Ethiopians and the Greeks from
the Egyptians. Sculpture and painting were perfected by
Homer’s time, as is proved by the inspired poet himself, who
wesents the shield of Achilles with such art that we seem to see
t carved and painted before our eyes rather than merely deseribed.
Lactantius Firmianus, in a fable, attributes their disgovery to Prometheus, 
who like God formed the human image from clay; and he affirms that
 the art of sculpture can be traced back to him.? According to Pliny, 
painting was brought to Egypt by Gyges of Lydia; for he says that Gyges
ance saw his own shadow cast by the light of a fire and in:
stantly drew his own outline on the wall with a piece of char
eoal. (Pliny adds that for some time afterwards men used to
compose their works using only lines and without colour.)
This method was later rediscovered, though more laboriously,
ly Philocles the Egyptian, and also by Cleanthes and Aridices
of Corinth, and by Telephanes of Sicyon.

Cleophantes of Corinth was the first of the Greeks to introduce 
colours and Apollodorus was the first to make use of the
brush. They were followed by Polygnotus of Thasos, Zeuxis,
and Timagoras of Chalcis, with Pythias and Aglaophon, all
of whom were famous artists. And after them came the
tolebrated Apelles, who was greatly honoured and cherished
for his genius by Alexander the Great and who, as we see in
Jueian, brilliantly investigated the nature of slander and false

The Iliad, Book XVII, where Homer describes in great detail Achilles
 and powerful shield, adorned all over, finished with a bright triple rim
wf gleaming metal...’, translation by E. V. Rieu (Penguin Books, 1950).
