But it sits uneasily with cases like Hadamard’s, who
reported finding a solution ‘quite different’ from any he 
had previously tried. If the gnat-like ideas, originally 
activated by conscious intent, are only ‘those from which we 
might reasonably expect the desiredsolution’, then how could such a thing happen?

Moreover, his image cannot explain why it is that combinations of
elements drawn from different domains may be more creative, as
opposed to more unnatural or absurd. Both these difficulties recall the
paradox mentioned in Chapter 1, and they can be resolved only when
we are clearer about the difference between creativity and mere
novelty.

A third caveat is that Poincaré was not Epicurean enough. Epicurus,
suggested that different material atoms have different shapes, and
differently shaped hooks, so that certain combinations are more likely
than others. But Poincaré put the hooks on the wall, not on the atoms,
and (since he ignored the shapes of atoms and hooks) implied nothing
about differential affinities between ideas — still less, how normal
affinities can be fruitfully overcome.

Finally, this picture of the chance impacts of undifferentiated atoms
leads to a fourth problem: Poincaré’s insistence on ‘the automatism of
the subliminal self’. —.

~ You may think it strange that I call this a ‘problem’, given my claim
(in Chapter 1) that ideas about computing can illuminate creativity. If
a computer is not an automaton, what is? Surely, someone favouring a
computational account of creativity must believe in the automatism of
the subliminal self (and, for that matter, of the conscious self too) ?
“Noriiecessarily, for ‘automatism’ can mean two different things. It

may mean (positively) that the system in question functions according
to scientifically intelligible principles which, together with its 
inputhistory, determine what it does."To speak of automatism in this sense is
to assert that something is a principled, and perhaps largely autonomous,
 system (or mechanism) _{ Alternatively, the term may be used
(negatively) to deny that the system enjoys properties such as choice,
discernment and judgment.

These two senses do not entail one another. They may not even apply
to exactly the same class of things, because it might be possible to
explain choice and judgment themselves in scientific terms. Whereas
my claim was positive (that creativity can be computationally understood) 
Poincaré’s was negative. In describing the subliminal self as
‘purely automatic’, he denied that it ‘is capable of discernment; [that] it
has tact, delicacy; [that] it knows how to choose, to divine’. In short, he
meant that the unconscious self, like a crowd of gas-molecules, is blind.

The Story So Far

Poincaré’s view that incubation is automatic, or blindly undiscriminating, 
was criticized by Koestler. Although agreeing on the importance of
the unconscious, Koestler did not see the random concourse ofa host of
separate gas-molecules as a helpful metaphor. Citing a rich and diverse
harvest of historical examples, he concluded:

The most fertile region [in the mind’s inner landscape] seems to be the
marshy shore, the borderline between sleep and full awakening — where the
Matrices of disciplined thought are already operating but~have not yet
sufficiently hardened to obstruct the dreamlike fluidity of imagination. '!

By ‘the matrices of disciplined thought’, he meant the ordered
conceptual structures which he assumed to underlie conscious
reasoning.

( Koestler explained creativity as the ‘bisociation’ of two conceptual
matrices which are not normally associated, and which may even seem
incompatible: “The basic bisociative pattern of the creative synthesis
[is] the sudden interlocking of two previously unrelated skills, or
matrices of thought.’'* [The more unusual the bisociation, the é
scope there is for truly creative ideas. Various types of unconscious
thinking may be involved, including visual imagery; concrete (sometimes 
personal) exemplars of abstract ideas; shifting emphasis;
reasoning backwards; and generating analogies of diverse kinds. In
addition, he emphasized the importance of long apprenticeship and
expertise, Whether m science or in art. 44. 7-—
~Boih Koestler and Poincaré, then, explained creativity in terms of
the unconscious combination of ideas drawn from different domains.
But only Koestler mentioned mental structure. He saw creativity as
exploiting, and being somehow unconsciously guided by, specific
conceptual matrices. yin

That is why Koestler rejected Poincaré’s explanation as
‘mechanistic’. Nothing guides one gnat to fly towards another, nothing
causes one gas-molecule to move nearer to another — and nothing
prevents their random dancing from falling into madness. Creativity
requires more than the mere automatic mixing of ideas. Even an
unguided bisociation of matrices is not enough:

{The} rebellion against constraints which are necessary to maintain the
order and discipline of conventional thought, but an impediment to the
creative leap, is symptomatic both of the genius and the crank; what
ilistinguishes them is the intuitive guidance which only the former enjoys.

As for how this intuitive guidance works, Koestler recognized the
need for a detailed explanation, of which (as he was well aware) he