

This elaborate arrangement is necessary because most particles live much 
less than a millionth of a second and are too small to be observed directly. 
In general, everything a particle physicist knows about subatomic particles, 
he deduces from his theories and from photographs of the tracks that
particles leave in a bubble chamber.

Bubble chamber photographs, thousands and thousands of
them, show clearly the frustrating situation which early
particle physicists encountered in their search for “elementary”
particles. When the projectile strikes the target, both particles 
are destroyed at the point of impact. In their place, however, 
are created new particles, all of which are as “elementary”
as the original particles and often as massive as the original
particles!


The schematic diagram above shows a typical particle interaction. 
A particle called a negative pi meson (1°) collides with a
proton (p). Both the pie meson and the proton are destroyed
and in their place are created two new particles, a neutral K
meson (K°) and a lambda particle (A). Both of these particles
decay spontaneously (no collision necessary) into two additional
particles, leaving four new particles. Of these four particles,
two of them are the same particles that we started with! It is
as though, wrote Finkelstein, we fling two clocks together,
they shatter, and out of them come flying not gears and springs
but more clocks, some of them as large as the originals.

How can this happen? The answer is partly given by
Einstein’s special theory of relativity. The new particles are
created from the kinetic energy (energy of motion) of the
projectile particle in addition to the mass of the projectile
particle and the mass of the target particle. The faster the
projectile particle is traveling, the more kinetic energy is 
available to create new particles at the point of impact. For this
reason, governments have spent more and more money to
construct larger and larger particle accelerators which can push
projectile particles to higher and higher velocities. If both the
projectile particle and the target particle are accelerated to
the point of impact, so much the more kinetic energy is available to 
create new particles to study.

Every subatomic interaction consists of the annihilation of
the original particles and the creation of new subatomic particles. 
The subatomic world is a continuation of creation
and annihilation, of mass changing to energy and energy 
changing to mass.* Transient forms sparkle in and out of existence
creating a never-ending, forever-newly-created reality.

Mystics from both the East and the West who claim to have
beheld “the face of God” speak in terms so similar to these
that any psychologist who professes an interest in altered states
of awareness scarcely can ignore this obvious bridge between
the disciplines of physics and psychology.

The first question of particle physics is, “What collides?”

According to quantum mechanics, a subatomic particle is
not a particle like a particle of dust. Rather, subatomic 
particles are “tendencies to exist’ (page 32) and “correlations 
between macroscopic observables” (page 70). They have no
objective existence. That means that we cannot assume, if we
are to use quantum theory, that particles have an existence
apart from their interactions with a measuring device (page
95). As Heisenberg wrote:

In the light of the quantum theory . . . elementary particles are 
no longer real in the same sense as objects of
daily life, trees or stones . . .*

* The mass/energy dualism of our ordinary conceptualizations does not exist in
the formalism of relativity or quantum theory. According to Einstein's E = me’,
mass does not change into energy or vice versa: Energy is mass. Wherever
energy, E, is present, mass, m, is present and the amount of mass, m, is given
by E = mc’. The total amount of energy, E, is conserved, and hence the total
amount of mass, m, also is conserved. This mass, m, is defined by the fact that
it is a source of the gravitational field.