From Science to Literature

possible—in any case, that it is likely to be achieved just where
we do not expect it, or at least not exactly where we expect it:
by—recent—tradition, we expect it in the realm of structure;
and no doubt we are partly right: every reading occurs within
a structure (however multiple, however open), and not in the
allegedly free space of an alleged spontaneity: there is no
“natural,” “wild” reading: reading does not overflow structure;
it is subject to it: it needs structure, it respects structure; but
reading perverts structure. Reading is the gesture of the body
(for of course one reads with one’s body) which by one and the
same movement posits and perverts its order: an interior
supplement of perversion.

2. Repression

I am not inquiring, strictly speaking, about the avatars of the
desire to read; notably, I cannot answer this irritating question:
Why don’t Frenchmen today want to read? Why, it appears, do
fifty percent of them not read? What we might consider is the
trace of desire—or of non-desire—that there is within a reading,
supposing that the will-to-read has already been assumed. And
first of all, the repressions of reading. Two of which come to
mind.

The first results from all the constraints—social or interiorized
by a thousand relays—which make reading a duty, in which the
very act of reading is determined by a law: the act of reading,
or better still, the act of having read, the almost ritual trace of
an initiation. Hence, I am not speaking of the “instrumental”
readings necessary to the acquisition of a specific kind of
knowledge, of a technique, and according to which the gesture
of reading vanishes beneath the act of learning: I am talking
about “free” readings, which you “must” nonetheless have
performed: you “must” have read (The Princess of Cléves, Anti-Oedipus). 
Where does the law come from? From various instances,
each of which is instituted as a value, as ideology: for the 
avantgarde militant, you “must” have read Bataille, Artaud. For a long
time, when reading was narrowly elitist, there were duties of
universal reading; I suppose that the collapse of humanist values
has put an end to these duties of reading: for them have been
substituted certain private duties, linked to the “role” the subject
acknowledges he has in today’s society; the law of reading no
longer comes from an eternity of culture, but from a bizarre,
or at least enigmatic, instance located between History and
Fashion. What I mean is that there are group laws, micro-laws,
from which one must be entitled to liberate oneself. Or again:
freedom to read, whatever its price, is also freedom not to read.
Who knows if certain things are not transformed, who knows
if certain important things do not happen (in work, in the
history of the historical subject) not only by the effect of readings
but also by the effect of reading’s omissions (forgettings): by
what we might call the unconstraints of reading? Or again: in
reading, Desire cannot be detached, whatever the cost to our
institutions, from its own pulsional negativity.

A second repression is perhaps that of the Library. No
question, of course, of contesting the institution, or of ignoring
its necessary development; but a question of acknowledging the
trace of repression in this fundamental and inevitable feature
of the public (or simply: collective) Library: its facticity. Facticity
in itself is not a road to-repression (Nature has nothing particularly
 liberating about it); if the Library’s facticity produces a
failure in the Desire to read, it is for two reasons.

1. By status, whatever its dimension, the Library is infinite,
insofar as it is always (however well-conceived it may be) both
short of and in excess of demand: tendentially, the book you
want is never there, while another book is offered to you: the
Library is the space of substitutes for desire; confronting the
adventure of reading, it is reality, in that it calls Desire to order:
to derive pleasure, satisfaction, gratification from a Library, the
subject must renounce the effusion of his own image-repertoire;
he must have done his Oedipus—that Oedipus I must not only
“do” at the age of four, but every day of my life that I desire.
Here in the Library, it is the very profusion of books which is
the law, castration.

2. The Library is a space one visits, but not that one inhabits.