
None of the elegies that were delivered at funerals in eighteenth-century 
village churches have been preserved, but the short and simple annals 
of the poor” have been preserved on
thousands of gravestones from that era.

(subordinate one of the clauses)
Although none of the elegies that were delivered at funerals in
eighteenth-century village churches have been preserved, the

short and simple annals of the poor” have been preserved on
thousands of gravestones from that era.

(c) whether to modify a noun with an adjective clause or
with a participial phrase or merely with an adjective.
(adjective clause)

The house, which was painted a garish red, did not find a
buyer for two months.

(participial phrase)

The house, painted a garish red, did not find a buyer for two
months.

(adjective)

The garishly red house did not find a buyer for two months.

(d) whether to use literal language or figurative language.
(literal)
The president walked into a room filled with angry reporters.

(figurative)
The president walked into a hornet’s nest.

(sauntered or walked), a formal word or a colloquial word
(children or kids).

(polysyllabic, formal words)
Everyone was astonished by her phenomenal equanimity.

(colloquial words)
Everyone was flabbergasted by her unusual cool.

(ordinary words)
Everyone was surprised by her composure.
() whether to begin a succession ef sentences with the
same word and the same structure or to vary the diction
and the structure.

(same word, same structure)
We wanted to preserve our heritage. We wanted to remind our
children of our national heroes. We wanted to inspire subsequent 
generations to emulate our example.

(different words, different structures)
We wanted to preserve our heritage. Our children, in turn,
needed to be reminded of our national heroes. Could we
inspire subsequent generations to emulate our example?

The availability of options such as these gives us the
opportunity to achieve variety in our style. By varying the
length, the rhythm, and the structure of our sentences, we can
avoid monotony, an attention-deadening quality in prose. The
previous sentence is a good example of the variety made
possible by the availability of options. All the meanings
packed into that sentence could be laid out in a series of
short sentences: