Suffering, this implies, contradicts the nature of
God. It is impossible for him to suffer, he is beyond it. 

Stoic as a human being is able to suffer. But he need not have
suffering conquer the center of his rational being. Hf
can keep himself above it because it is a consequence 
that which is not his essential being but is accidental
him. The distinction between “beyond” and “abovve"
implies a value judgment. The wise man who courageously
conquers desire, suffering, and anxiety “surpass
God himself.” He is above the God who by his nature
perfection and blessedness is beyond all this. 

On the back of such a valuation the courage of wisdom 
and resignation could be replaced by the courage of faith 
in salvation that is by faith in a God who paradoxically 
participated in human suffering. But Stoicism itself can never
make step.

We acknowledged, are “fools,” in the bondage of desires and
fears. While Participating in the divine Logos with their
essential or rational nature, most human beings are in
a state of actual conflict with their own rationality and
therefore unable to affirm their essential being courageously.

It was impossible for the Stoics to explain this situation.
Stoicism reaches its limits wherever the question is),
asked: How is the courage of wisdom possible? Although!
the Stoics emphasized that all human beings are equal in
that they participate in the universal Logos, they could I
not deny the fact that wisdom is the possession of only
an infinitely small elite. The masses of the people that
which they could not deny. 

And it was not only the predominance of the “fools” among 
the masses that they could not explain. Something in the wise men 
themselves also faced them with a difficult problem. Seneca says that
No courage is so great as that which is born of utter desperation. 
But, one must ask, has the Stoic as a Stoic reached the state of 
“utter desperation”? Can he reach it in the frame of his philosophy? 
Or is there something absent in his despair and consequently in his
 courage? The Stoic as a Stoic does not experience the despair of personal guilt.

Epictetus quotes as an example Socrates’ words in Xenophon’s Memorabilia 
of Socrates: “I have maintained that which is under my control” and 
“I have never done any thing that was wrong in my private or in my-public life.
And Epictetus himself asserts that he has learned not to care for 
anything that is outside the realm of his moral purpose. But more revealing 
than such statements is the general attitude of superiority and complacency which
characterizes the Stoic diatribai, their moral orations and
public accusations. The Stoic cannot say, as Hamlet does,
that “conscience” makes cowards of us all. He does not
see the universal fall from essential rationality to existential
 foolishness as a matter of responsibility and as a problem of guilt. 

The courage to be for him is the courage to
courage to affirm oneself in spite of sin and guilt. It could
not have been different: for the courage to face one’s own
guilt leads to the question of salvation instead of renunciation.
