
[ xii ]

INTRODUCTION

jot down the philosophy embodied not only in the Odyssey
iin everything he has written, for he was a man of one overwhelming
Hi Miriving to give it shape in all the forms he could master, in epic,
A novel, (travelogue, criticism, translation, and even political action.
{ vinmary of the skeletal ideas of that book will place in a more
sy henetble order the same vision which is scattered and intermingled
il) narrative and incident in the Odyssey, primarily in Books XIV, XVI,
vol in those following when Odysseus meets various representative types
of mankind such as Prince Motherth (of Buddha), Margaro Cof the
t ites), the Hermit Cof Faust), Captain Sole Cof Don Quixote), the
tard of the Tower Cof the Hedonist), and the Negro Fisher-lad Cof
(livin), 1 have appended a complete synopsis of the poem at the back of
this book, but a reading at this moment of the brief summaries of Book
NAV and XVI will help the reader toward a better understanding of the
exposition which follows.

A man, writes Kazantzakis, has three duties. His first duty is to the
mind which imposes order on disorder, formulates laws, builds bridges
aver the unfathomable abyss, and sets_up rational boundaries beyond
which man does not dare to go. But his second duty is to the heart, which
admits of no boundaries, which yearns to pierce beyond phenomena and
to merge with something beyond mind and matter. His third duty is to
free himself from both mind and heart, from the great temptation of the
hope which both offer of subduing phenomena or of finding the essence
of things. A man must then embrace the annihilating abyss without any
hope, he must say that nothing exists, neither life nor death, and must
accept this necessity bravely, with exultation and song. He may then build
the affirmative structure of his life over this abyss in an ecstasy of tragic
A man is now prepared to undertake a pilgrimage of four stages. At the
start of his journey, he hears an agonized cry within him shouting for help.
His first step is to plunge into his own ego until he discovers that it is the
endangered spirit Cor “God’”) locked within each man that is crying out
for liberation, In order to free it, each man must consider himself solely
responsible for the salvation of the world, because when a man dies, that
aspect of the universe which is his own particular vision and the unique
play of his mind also crashes in ruins forever. In the second step, a man
must plunge beyond his ego and into his racial origins; yet among his
forefathers he must choose only those who can help him toward greater
refinement of spirit, that he may in turn pass on his task to a son who
may also surpass him. The third step for a man is to plunge beyond his
own particular race into the races of all mankind and to suffer their composite agony in the struggle to liberate God within themselves. The fourth
step is to plunge beyond mankind and to become identified with all the
universe, with animate and inanimate matter, with earth, stones, sea,
plants, animals, insects, and birds, with the vital impulse of creation in all
phenomena. Each man is a fathomless composite of atavistic roots plunging down to the primordial origin of things. A man is now prepared to go

[ xiii ]