

when its own individual properties start to be seen. The shape of
the leaves, the number of blooms are all unique to just this one
flower, even among the other flowers of the same species. Or ‘
it the stage of full bloom, the crescendo of all of the energy ran
effort it took to reach this point in its life? Let’s not forget that
humble and quiet ending when it return ° the soil from where
that point is the flower perfect’ . -

Already know that the answer is that ie
always perfect. It is perfect at being wherever it Is a a
whatever stage of growth it is in at that moment. It is perfect at
being a seed when it is placed into the ground. At that moment
in time, it is exactly what it is supposed to be....a seed, Jus
because it does not have brightly colored blooms doesn't mean
it is not a good flower seed. When it first sprouts through in
ground it is not imperfect because it only displays the 
green. At each stage of growth from seed to full bloom an
beyond it is perfect at being a flower at that particular stage, 
flower's life. A flower must start as a seed, and even though 
seed holds within itself all that the flower will ever be, it i
not budge one millimeter farther toward its potential referential
of full bloom without the nourishment of water, soil and aut
but also time. It takes time for all of these things to work
to produce the "Flower."

et aren that a flower seed sits in the ground ang
says, “This is going to take forever. I have to push all ns dig
out of my way just to get to the surface and see the sun. na y
time it rains or somebody waters me I'm soaking wet surrounded by mud. 

When do I get to be happy, that's when everybody will be impressed with me
hope I'm an orchid and not some wild flower nobody HG iq ;
Orchids have it all...no wait; I want to be an oak tree. They file
bigger than anybody else in the forest and live longer =e a
As silly as this may sound, this is exactly what wi i"
and we do it, as they say, every day and in every way y :
consciously or unconsciously pick a point of reference va
regard to whatever it is we are doing and decide that nothing
Is right until we get to that point. If you step back and observe
your internal dialogue from time to time during the day, you
will be amazed at how hard you work against yourself with this
type of thinking. When we are driving somewhere we can't wait
to get there. Wherever there is, I doubt very much it matters
whether we arrive fifteen minutes later 95% of the time.

When I am driving on the highway, all around me
people are pushing the speed limit to the maximum and
probably never notice most of what they drive past. When I
look in my rear view mirror I see someone who is irritated with
the world for getting in their way and exhausted by the stress
and strain that impatience brings to the body and mind when we
live in this state. If you step back routinely during your day and
observe where your attention is, you will be amazed at how few
limes it is where you are and on what you are doing.

When you develop a present-minded approach to every
ictivity you are involved in, and like the flower realize that at
Whatever level you are performing, you are perfect at that point
in time, you will experience a tremendous relief from the
fictitious, self-imposed pressures and expectations that only
slow your progress. At any point in the day when you are
involved in an activity and you notice you are feeling bored,
iMpatient, rushed, or disappointed with your performance level,
Weulize that you have left the present moment in your activity.
0oOk at where your mind and energy are focused. You will find
Mit you have strayed either into the future or the past. You may
ie subconsciously focused on the result or product you are
ing to accomplish. This is usually found in activities that
HOduce a tangible product, and could be anything from painting
@ house to losing weight. I would class this as a distraction
the future because what is pulling you out of the present
i into the future is the product or result that you are trying to
Homplish. You want to get to “full bloom” and skip the rest of

Sometimes, though, it is not a tangible thing that pulls us
Hy Irom the present, but a circumstance. Imagine this. You