

It is not only I who say this quand méme,° but she, too, and
instinctively so, quand méme. That is why I saw something
grand in her from the outset. Only it’s a confounded pity that
she allowed herself to be overwhelmed by disappointments in
her youth, overwhelmed in the sense that her old-fashioned
religious family felt they had to suppress the active, indeed,
highly gifted element in her and so rendered her passive for
evermore. If only they had not broken her in her youth! Or if
they had left it at that instead of once again driving her to
distraction, and this time with 5 or 6 or even more women

fighting against her alone. Just read Daudet’s L’évangeliste about
those women’s intrigues — those here were different, yet of the
same sort.

Oh, Theo, why should I change — I used to be very passive
and very gentle and quiet — I’m that no longer, but then I’m

4 Mouret says, ‘If you think you are strong because you refuse to be stupid and to
suffer, well, then you're just a fool, that’s all’

‘Are you enjoying yourself?’

Mouret did not seem to understand immediately, but when he remembered their
earlier conversation about the empty stupidity and the pointless torture of life, he
replied, ‘Of course — I have never lived so intensely... Ah, my dear fellow, don’t scoff!
The hours in which one dies of suffering are the shortest.’

I want her, I shall have her! ... and — if she escapes me then you'll see what I do to
be cured of it all — You don’t understand this language, my dear fellow, otherwise
you’d know that action is its own reward — to act, to create. To fight against the facts,
to conquer them or be conquered by them, therein lies all human health and
happiness!

That’s just acting in order to forget — muttered the other, “Well, I prefer such action
— if perish we must — I would sooner perish of passion than be bored to death.’ (Emile
Zola, Au bonheur des dames)

5 In spite of everything.

I am no longer a child either now — sometimes I feel my own man.
Take Mauve, why is he quick-tempered and difficult to get on
with at times? I haven’t come as far as he has, but I, too, shall go
further than I am now.

I tell you, if one wants to be active, one must not be afraid of
going wrong, must not be afraid of making mistakes now and
then. Many people think that they will become good just by
doing no harm — but that’s a lie, and you yourself used to call it
that. That way lies stagnation, mediocrity.

Just slap anything on when you see a blank canvas staring at
you like some imbecile. You don’t know how paralysing that is,
that stare of a blank canvas, which says to the painter: you can’t
do a thing. The canvas has an idiotic stare and mesmerises some
painters so much that they turn into idiots themselves. Many
painters are afraid in front of the blank canvas, but the blank
canvas is afraid of the real, passionate painter who dares and
who has broken the spell of ‘you can’t’ once and for all.

Life itself, too, is forever turning an infinitely vacant, disheartening, 
dispiriting blank side towards man on which nothing
appears, any more than it does on a blank canvas. But no matter
how vacant and vain, how dead life may appear to be, the man
of faith, of energy, of warmth, who knows something, will not be
put off so easily. He wades in and does something and stays with
it, in short, he violates, ‘defiles’ — they say. Let them talk, those
cold theologians.

Theo, I feel so much confounded pity for this woman, just
because her age and just possibly a liver and gallbladder complaint 
hang so threateningly over her head. And this is aggravated
by emotions. For all that, we shall find out what can or what,
fatally, cannot be done. However I shall do nothing without a
very good doctor, so I shall do her no harm.

Just because I anticipate that, if our roads should lead us to
one and the same place, we might have rather strong differences
of opinion — for that very reason I don’t want you to be able to
hold my dependence on you against me. I am still in two minds
about what I should try to do, but in all probability I shall not be
staying on here — and the question will then be, where to?