Killing the God

of February, which is also the beginning of the Chinese New
Year, the governor or Prefect of the city goes in procession to
the east gate of the city, and sacrifices to the Divine Husbandman, 
who is represented with a bull’s head on the body of a
man. A large effigy of an 0x, cow, or buffalo has been prepared
for the occasion, and stands outside of the east gate, with
agricultural implements beside it. The figure is made of differently
-coloured pieces of Paper pasted on a framework either by
a blind man or according to the directions of a necromancer,
The colours of the paper prognosticate the character of the _
coming year; if red prevails, there will be many fires; if white,
there will be floods and rain; and so with the other colours. 

The mandarins walk slowly round the Ox, beating it severely at each
step with rods of various hues. It is filled with five kinds of
grain, which pour forth when the effigy is broken by the blows
of the rods. The Paper fragments are then set on fire, and a
scramble takes place for the burning fragments, because the
people believe that whoever gets one of them is sure to be
fortunate throughout the year. A live buffalo is next killed, and
its flesh is divided among the mandarins. According to one
account, the effigy of the ox is made of clay, and, after being
beaten by the governor, is stoned by the people till they break
it in pieces, ‘from which they expect an abundant year’. Here
the corn-spirit appears to be plainly represented by the cornfilled 
ox, whose fragments may therefore be supposed to bring
fertility with them.

On the whole we may perhaps conclude that both as a goat
and as a bull Dionysus was essentially a god of vegetation. The
Chinese and European customs which I have cited may perhaps
shed light on the custom of rending a live bull or goat at the
rites of Dionysus. The animal was torn in fragments, as the
Khond victim was cut in pieces, in order that the worshippers
might each secure a portion of the life-giving and fertilising
influence of the god. The flesh was eaten raw as a sacrament,
and we may conjecture that some of it was taken home to be
buried in the fields, or otherwise employed so as to convey to
the fruits of the earth the quickening influence of the god of
vegetation. The resurrection of Dionysus, related in his myth,
may have been enacted in his rites by stuffing and setting up
the slain ox, as was done at the Athenian bouphonia.

Killing the God

Passing next to the corn-goddess Demeter, and remembering meter he
that in European folk-lore the pig is a common embodiment of a
the corn-spirit, we may now ask whether the pig, which was so
closely associated with Demeter, may not have been originally
the goddess herself in animal form? The pig was sacred to her;
in art she was portrayed carrying or accompanied by a pig; and
the pig was regularly sacrificed in her mysteries, the reason
assigned being that the pig injures the corn and is therefore an
enemy of the goddess. 

But after an animal has been conceived as a god, or a god as an 
animal, it sometimes happens, as we have seen, that the god sloughs 
off his animal form and becomes purely anthropomorphic; and that 
then the animal, which at first had been slain in the character 
of the god, comes to be viewed as a victim offered to the god 
on the ground of its hostility to the deity; in short, the god 
is sacrificed to himself 

On the ground that he is his own enemy. This happened to
Dionysus, and it may have happened to Demeter also. And in
fact the rites of one of her festivals, the Thesmophoria,* bear
out the view that originally the pig was an embodiment of the
corn-goddess herself, either Demeter or her daughter and
double Persephone. The Attic Thesmophoria was an autumn
festival, celebrated by women alone in October, and appears to
have represented with mourning rites the descent of Persephone
(or Demeter) into the lower world, and with joy her return from
the dead. Hence the name Descent or Ascent variously applied
to the first, and the name Kalligeneia (fair-born) applied to the
third day of the festival. Now it was customary at the Thesmophoria 
to throw pigs, cakes of dough, and branches of pine-trees
into ‘the chasms of Demeter and Persephone’, which appear to
have been sacred caverns or vaults. In these caverns or vaults
there were said to be serpents, which guarded the caverns and
consumed most of the flesh of the pigs and dough-cakes which
were thrown in. Afterwards—apparently at the next annual
festival—the decayed remains of the pigs, the cakes, and the
pine-branches were fetched by women called ‘drawers’, who,
after observing rules of ceremonial purity for three days,
descended into the caverns, and, frightening away the serpents
