

of our perceptual capacities, we can cite, according to
preference, the consenting victims of electricity, those of
the photographic snapshot and those of the optical illusion
of cinema — these various items of representational equipment 
which have swelled the ranks of the partially sighted
and of those whom Walter Benjamin dubbed the image
illiterates.

Even in his day, Jean Rostand reckoned that radio ‘had
not perhaps made us ish, but that it had made”
foolishness noisier’. It was to become deafening with the
‘Walkman’ and blinding with television and ‘that 
intensification of detail and colour, that bombardment of
images which have now replaced words’, as Ray Bradbury
observed.

“The masses are rushing, running, charging through the
age. They think they are advancing, but they are simply ’
running on the spot and falling into the void, that is all?
observed Kafka. !

Motion sickness — known technically as ‘kinetosis’, a
condition which makes us part-time members of the disabled 
community, traveller-voyeurs — was the logical
forerunner of instant transmission sickness, with the rapid
emergence of the ‘Net junkies’, ‘Webaholics’ and other
forms of cyberpunk struck down with IAD (Internet
Addiction Disorder), their memories turned into junkshops — 
great dumps of images of all kinds and origins, used
and shop-soiled symbols, piled up any old how.

While the youngest children, with their noses stuck to
the screen from infants’ school onwards, are already going
down with hyperactivity disorders due to a brain dysfunction
 which produces erratic activity, serious attention
deficits and uncontrollable impulsive acts.


And, with access to the information superhighways set
to become more commonplace, an increase in the number
of armchair travellers — those distant offshoots of the silent. 
They alone will suffer the full range of communication 
disturbances acquired over therecent centuries of technology.

In this field progress acts like a forensic scientist on us, 
violating each bodily orifice that is to be autopsied, as a prelude
to the brutal incursions that are to follow. It does not simply
affect individuals, it penetrates them. It heaps up, accumulates
and condenses in each of us the full range of (visual, social,
psycho-motor, affective, intellectual, sexual, etc.) detrital
disorders which it has taken on with each innovation, each
with their full complement of specific injuries.

Without even suspecting it, we have become the heirs
and descendants of some fearsome antecedents, the prisoners of 
hereditary defects transmitted now not through the genes, 
sperm or blood, but ‘through an unutterable technical contamination.
~ By virtue of this loss of ‘behavioural freedom’, all criticism
of technology has just about disappeared and we have slid
unconsciously from pure technology to techno-culture and,
lastly, to the dogmatism of a totalitarian techno-cult in which
everyone is caught in the trap not of a society and its moral,
social or cultural laws and prohibitions, but of what these
centuries of progress have made of us and of our own bodies.

Those disabled in war or injured in serious road or work
accidents, victims of terrorism and people who have lost
arms, legs, their mobility, sight, speech or virility are all
afflicted at the same time by a forgetting, a paramnesia.
On the one hand, they more or less consciously repress