

even be said that European novel prose is born and shaped in 1f
process of a free (that is, reformulating) translation of other
works. It is only with French novelistic prose that the aspect
translation, in the strict sense, was not so characteristic i i
early stages—for the French, the process of “transposing,” Of
verses into prose was more fundamental. The birth of novelist
prose in Germany is especially paradigmatic in this regard} 
created by a Germanized French aristocracy in the process
their translation and transposition of French prose.

These were the beginnings of novelistic prose in Germany,
The language consciousness characteristic for those 
the prose novel was fully decentered and relativized, It 
wondered freely among languages in search of material it could 
its own, easily detaching any material from any language (that)
from among the languages available) and assimilating its
own” language and world. And this “language of its own! 
unstable, still coalescing—offered no resistance to the translation
transposer. The result was a complete rupture between lanaguage
and its material, the profound indifference of one to the ail
The “style” specific to such prose has its origins in this)
otherness of language and its material.

To speak of style in such cases is not really possible, we 
only speak of a form of exposition. For what takes place have
precisely the substitution of sheer exposition for style. Style
be defined as the fundamental and creative [triple] relationship
discourse to its object, to the speaker himself and to ancihy
discourse; style strives organically: o-aasisnilate- mateel
language and Ianguage into material. Style cannot accom”
anything that is in excess of this exposition, anything given
ready shaped, formed in words; style either permeates the oly
directly and without any mediation, as in poetry, or relie }
own intentions, as in literary prose (even the prose novelist
not expound the speech of another, but rather constructs i) Af
tic image of it). Thus the chivalric romance in verse, while 1)
is defined by a rupture between material and language, 1) #
overcome this gap and to assimilate material to its lan
thereby creating a special variant of authentic novelistio #

47. Translating and assimilating alien material is completed heir #
the individual consciousness of the creators of novels: this proces), le
and multi-staged, is accomplished in the literary-language consol
the epoch. Individual consciousness neither begins it nor ends it, Wik
of its progress.


‘ e earliest novelistic prose arises and is shaped precisely as
ory prose, and for a long time this fact governed its fate

not of course only the elementary fact of a free translation
I texts, nor the cultural internationalism of its creators
termines the specific quality of this expository prose. ths.
wth creators and audience of chivalric verse romances
iificiently international in terms of their culture. Of great
ance also was the fact that such prose lacked a firm unilal basis, possessed no calm and assured self-confidence
would derive from an association with a fixed social

well known, the printing of books played an extremely
nt role in the history of the chivalric romance, for it
 shift and displace its audience. It served to shift 
into a mute mode of perception, a shift decisive for the
#xenre. This societal disorientation becomes deeper and
as the novel continues its development, and the
romance, a product of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
a period of wandering between social classes, a
that ends only when it is absorbed into the "toll Tiers
i: reading public made up of lower social groups: from
I vel it is brought back up into the light of a literarily
ted consciousness by the Romantics.
) pauie briefly on the specific features in this earliest of
Wels, It is a discourse divorced from its material and not
f hy the unity of a social ideology; it is surrounded by
Iv ‘ll as language diversity, it lacks any support or cening, between social classes, lacking any roots, this dis-
' foreed to assume a character compounded of specific
14) this was not however the healthy conventionality of
ber re but rather one resulting from the impossibility,
ie Conditions, of making full artistic use of discourse, or
4 it in a wide diversity of aspects. poy
ae (hat is divorced from its material or from a supportmle I unity organic to it has much in it that is super-
# essary, not available for authentic artistic conceptu-
I I is necessary to neutralize or somehow structure all
iii the discourse in such a way that it not prove an

end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century
jwinited editions of almost all the courtly romances that had
ijt to that time,