
It is in these areas that the highest mental processes occur
as symbolic activities, anticipations of the future, and abstractions
any kind. In both hemispheres the TOP area includes parts of the
temporal, occipital, and parietal lobes, from the first letters of which it
derives its name. Specifically it consists of a large part of the temporal
lobe (Brodmann’s areas 20, 21, and 37) and a small part of the parititural
and occipital lobes (consisting of the most central parts of Brodman
areas 7, 19, 39, and 4o), as seen in Figure 17-1. From a physiological
point of view the TOP area may be considered as the center of functionality
of a much larger area including all of the parietal and occipetalt 
and most of the temporal lobes. These three lobes form the part (
the brain that receives stimuli from the external world and process
them into progressively higher constructs. All of the stimuli coming
from other parts of the cortex are synthesized and elaborated into this
highest mental constructs in the TOP area. Of course, we must not
consider this area as isolated or as functioning by itself. 

First of all, it is associated with the corresponding area of the opposite 
hemispheré by means of fibers that pass through the corpus callosum. 
It has important connections with the frontal lobes, without which it could 
not function at all, and it is also connected with much lower structure
through the aehipaliens :

We should not think that only the TOP area is required for thal D I
highest mental processes. The neuronal networks (or engrams) that I
mediate the highest mental processes extend to many other areas,
However, as I have discussed in detail elsewhere (Arieti 1955, 1956b,
1974), the TOP area is needed for the highest processes of abstraction,
Perceptions, images, primitive symbols, verbal symbols, and others,¥
are elaborated here into the highest conceptualizations, hypotheses,#
ideals, ethics, aesthetics, scientific pursuits, and syntheses.

The TOP area could not function without the concerted activity
of the PF (prefrontal) area, which consists of Brodmann’s areas 9§
through 12. The PF area has four major functions. he first is to)
maintain a steadfastness of purpose against distracting impulses from
the environment (Malmo 1942); in other words, the function of focal)
attention. The importance of focal attention as a prerequisite for]
higher mental processes has been illustrated by Schachtel (1954). As
Schachtel wrote, each act of focal attention consists not just of one
sustained approach to the object to which it is directed, but of several
renewed approaches. Focal attention requires the ability to suppress
secondary stimuli and to delay the response to them. It is obvious that
the high elaboration of stimuli mentioned in connection with the TOP
areas could not take place if this function of the PF areas did not permit it.

A second function of the PF areas is to anticipate the future
('reeman and Watts 1942), a third function is to permit planned or
seriatim functions. By seriatim functions is meant the organization or
eee of site: acts or ee os into an ee. series a

se iene e for. ‘the. purp nse of Fans. the veers ‘goal cree
1936). Finally, the fourth function of the PF areas is to make choices
and to initiate the transformation of the mental choice into a motor
action.

There seems to be no doubt that the TOP and PF areas elaborate
the psychological material coming from other areas of the central ner-

(393)