

Thus thought the many-minded man as his skull swelled
a and his throat strove to cry out sweetly, “Brothers, brothers!”
but he was suddenly startled and stepped back with fear,
for the cave’s azure darkness flashed with streaks of flame,
with many-colored wings, moist nostrils, sword-sharp horns,
and his cowed leopard cub crouched at her master’s feet;
all quivering beasts crawled speechlessly and shook with fright
as by a mute invisible hunter pushed and probed.
They longed to speak a brotherly word, but their thick brains
turned mud and tumbled in their crude impounded skulls.
Never had the much-suffering man felt such huge sorrow,
for the beasts’ groans were heavy in the azure air;
he opened his arms wide and cried, “Welcome, my brothers!”
He rose, and all at once a warbling joy swept through him,
his brain turned to dense forests, his veins to swift streams,
and all his skull brimmed over with horns, tails, and wings.
The coral coils of his head swirled, the world rushed on,
and like a wealthy lord who in his tower, erect,
receives his ancient warriors and his faithful friends,
thus did the wandering man hail all the beasts with awe:
“Welcome to my dark head, to my tall brazen tower,
fierce fighters, comrades, kings of earth! Make way! Make way!
Leviathan now, our great primeval forefather comes
with his stooped heavy head a mass of mud and brains.
O great grandfather, I stretch to kiss your rough rude knees.
Tall fortress, mountain undefiled, I hear you thrash
like a wild sea beneath your cracked and wrinkled hide.
O tall tomb, wrathful horns, hides, flesh, and rank manure,
you trample on the newborn soul’s wet fledgling wings
that smother and strive hopelessly to lift your weight.
Iam your fortunate soul that from your heavy thighs,
your deep dark castle doors, dashed into light to play.
Look at my brows and eyes, Grandfather—don’t you know me?
Night-prowling ancient ghost, deaf ears, glazed eyes, mute mouth
you stoop to earth and you don’t know your grandson still!
Make way for him to see! May his dim memory blaze!”
Odysseus cried, stepped back for his great grandfather to leave,
then opened his arms wide, stooped low and hailed his father:
“Hail to our king, O Ape with future golden crown,
with your vermilion fat behind, a king’s red robes!
Joy to that father who sees his son and thinks in secret:
‘Tm but a beast. What shame to walk or talk with him!
My mind's a lump of blood and fur—what can I say?
I'll gape at him from the dark woods as he goes by.’
Father, behind the trees, deep in the hollow trunks,
I see your much-tormented and much-honored face.



raise your head on high, don’t be ashamed,
 savage earth you have fulfilled your strife 
with patience, hunger, groans and fears; 
your sad eyes proudly, marvel at your Breath. 

ye all day and roll your lump of dung on earth,
J then rise and grasp it tightly, fall again,
cusp it once more and start the steep ascent. 
Let him pass, my brothers! He, too, is a great go !
4), I suppose, a monstrous scarab shoves a 
 dung-sphere of earth and rolls : rik e sky

T ane 1