

Whether boredom nor anxiety are positive experiences, so Alex will be motivated
to return to the flow state. How is he to do it? Glancing again at the diagram, we
ee that if he is bored (A,) and wishes to be in flow again, Alex has essentially
nly one choice: to increase the challenges he is facing. (He also has a second
choice, which is to give up tennis altogether—in which Case A would simply disappear 
from the diagram.) By setting himself a new and more difficult goal that
matches his skills—for instance, to beat an opponent just a little more advanced
hat he is—Alex would be back in flow (A,).

Challenges

Alex is anxious (A;), the way back to flow requires that he increase his skills.
theoretically he could also reduce the challenges he is facing, and thus return
) the flow where he started (in A,), but in practice it is difficult to ignore 
challenges once one is aware that they exist.

The diagram shows that both A, and A, represent situations in which Alex is
in flow. Although both are equally enjoyable, the two states are quite different
i that A, is a more complex experience than A,. It is more complex because it
volves greater challenges, and demands Greater skill from the player.

ut A,, although complex and enjoyable, does not represent a stable situation
ther. As Alex keeps playing, either he will become bored by the stale 
opportunities he finds at that level, or he will become anxious and frustrated by his
latively low ability. So the motivation to enjoy himself again will push him
get back into the flow channel, but now at a level of complexity even higher
an A4.

Challenges

is this dynamic feature that explains why flow activities lead to growth and
disscovery. One cannot enjoy doing the same thing at the same level for long.
e grow either bored or frustrated, and then the desire to enjoy ourselves again
pushes us to stretch our skills, or to discover new opportunities for using them. (Low)
Youu can see how keeping someone in the flow channel is a delicate balance, for
yer’s skill level seldom stays in one place. As their skill increases, you must

Flow
channel

FOCUS

Present them with commensurate challenges. For traditional games, this challenge
primarily comes from seeking out more challenging opponents. In videogames,
(here is often a sequence of levels that gradually get more challenging. This pattern
il levels of increasing difficulty is nicely self-balancing—players with a lot of skill
a) usually move through the lower levels quickly, until they come to the levels that
fliallenge them. This connection between skill and the speed of finishing a level
lielps keep skilled players from getting bored. However, it is the rare player who is
persistent enough to win the game, mastering each level where they spend so much time 
in the frustration zone that they give up on the game. There is much debate about 
whether that is a bad thing (many players are frustrated) or a good thing 
(since only skilled, persistent players can reach
(he end, the accomplishment is special).

