

prohibition is also observed, though less Strictly, as a common
tule of life. Thus some of the Esthonians will not taste blood
because they believe that it contains the animal’s soul, which
would enter the body of the person who tasted the blood. Some
Indian tribes of North America, ‘through a strong principle of
religion, abstain in the strictest manner from eating the blood
of any animal, as it contains the life and spirit of the beast’.
Jewish hunters poured out the blood of the game they had killed
and covered it up with dust. They would not taste the blood,
believing that the soul or life of the animal was in the blood, or
actually was the blood.

It is a common rule that royal blood may not be shed upon
the ground. Hence when a king or one of his family is to be put
to death a mode of execution is devised by which the royal
blood shall not be spilt upon the earth. About the year 1688 the
generalissimo of the army rebelled against the king of Siam and
put him to death ‘after the manner of royal criminals, or as
princes of the blood are treated when convicted of capital
crimes, which is by putting them into a large iron caldron, and
pounding them to pieces with wooden pestles, because none of
their royal blood must be spilt on the ground, it being, by their
I religion, thought great impiety to contaminate the divine blood
by mixing it with earth’. When Kublai Khan defeated and took
his uncle Nayan, who had rebelled against him, he caused
Nayan to be put to death by being wrapt in a carpet and tossed
to and fro till he died, ‘because he would not have the blood of
his Line Imperial spilt upon the ground or exposed in the eye
of Heaven and before the Sun’. Friar Ricold mentions the
Tartar maxim: ‘One Khan will put another to death to get
Possession of the throne, but he takes great care that the blood
be not spilt. For they say that it is highly improper that the
blood of the Great Khan should be spilt upon the ground; so
they cause the victim to be smothered somehow or other.’ The
like feeling prevails at the court of Burma, where a peculiar
mode of execution without bloodshed is reserved for princes of
the blood.

The reluctance to spill royal blood seems to be only a
particular case of a general unwillingness to shed blood or at
least to allow it to fall on the ground. Marco Polo tells us that
in his day persons caught in the streets of Cambaluc (Peking)
at unseasonable hours were arrested, and if found guilty of a
misdemeanour were beaten with a stick. ‘Under this punishment people 
sometimes die, but they adopt it in order to eschew
bloodshed, for their Bacsis say that it is an evil thing to shed
man’s blood.’ In West Sussex people believe that the ground on
which human blood has been shed is accursed and will remain
barren for ever. Among some primitive peoples, when the blood
of a tribesman has to be spilt it is not suffered to fall upon the
ground, but is received upon the bodies of his fellow-tribesmen.
Thus in some Australian tribes boys who are being circumcised
are laid on a platform, formed by the living bodies of the
tribesmen; and when a boy’s tooth is knocked out as an
initiatory ceremony, he is seated on the shoulders of a man, on
whose breast the blood flows and may not be wiped away. ‘Also
the Gauls used to drink their enemies’ blood and paint themselves therewith. 
So also they write that the old Irish were
wont; and so have I seen some of the Irish do, but not their
enemies’ but friends’ blood, as, namely, at the execution of a ,. J
notable traitor at Limerick, called Murrogh O’Brien, I saw an 6
old woman, which was his foster-mother, take up his head
whilst he was quartered and suck up all the blood that ran Cane
thereout, saying that the earth was not worthy to drink it, and
therewith also steeped her face and breast and tore her hair,
crying out and shrieking most terribly.’

The general explanation of the reluctance to shed blood on
the ground is probably to be found in the belief that the soul is.
in the blood, and that therefore any ground on which it may fall
necessarily becomes taboo or sacred. In New Zealand anything
upon which even a drop of a high chief’s blood chances to fall
becomes taboo or sacred to him. For instance, a party of natives
having come to visit a chief in a fine new canoe, the chief got
into it, but in doing so a splinter entered his foot, and the blood
trickled on the canoe, which at once became sacred to him. The
owner jumped out, dragged the canoe ashore opposite the
chief’s house, and left it there. Again, a chief in entering a
missionary’s house knocked his head against a beam, and the
blood flowed. The natives said that in former times the house
would have belonged to the chief. As usually happens with
taboos of universal application, the prohibition to spill the blood
of a tribesman on the ground applies with peculiar stringency