Divided space: This kind of space is most like a real map and is common in
ames that are trying to replicate a real map. It is achieved by carving the space
up into sections in an irregular way. Some examples of games that have divided
space are as follows:

a, Risk
b. Axis and Allies
c, Dark Tower

3. Web: A web arrangement is achieved by marking several points on a mapI
connecting them with paths. This is useful when you have several places
want players to visit but you want to give them a number of different way
get to them. Sometimes there is meaningful travel along the paths, but oI
times, travel is instantaneous. Some examples of web-based game spaces 
follows: i. Zelda: Ocarina of Time

Fox and Geese ce. Civilization

Trivial Pursuit
Zork
Club Penguin

ae @ DB Pp

Puzzle Quest

These different organizing principles are often combined to make interesting new
types of game spaces. The game of Clue is a combination of the grid and divided
»pace patterns. Baseball is a combination of a linear structure and points in space, —

§ Word about Landmarks

very important thing to consider whenever you organize a space: What are the
Landmarks? The very first text adventure game, Colossal Cave, had two different masen-
) one, every area was described as “You are in a maze of twisty passages, all ali
4 as confusing though was the opposite maze, in which every area was deserted.

"You are in a maze of twisty passages, all different.” For it is certainly true that
too much chaos is just as monotonous as too much order. Players of Colossal Cave learne
“drop items in the mazes, forming landmarks that helped them find their way, Ati
sd game space has built-in landmarks, which help the players find where they at
‘in, and also make the space interesting to look at. Landmarks are what played
remember and what they talk about, for they are what make a space memorable,

. Points in space: This somewhat uncommon type of game space is usually
games that want to evoke something like wandering a desert and occasion
returning to an oasis, like one does in an RPG. It also is common for
where players get to define the game space themselves. Some examples of
kind of spatial organization are the following:

a. Bocce
b. Thin Ice (a board game involving wet marbles and a napkin)
c. Polarity (magnetic board game)