

Undoubtedly, many of the affirmations of Lenin, who
was a passionate lover of justice, can still be opposed to
the Stalinist regime; mainly, the notion of the withering
away of the State. Even if it is admitted that the proletarian
 State cannot disappear before many years have
passed, it is still necessary, according to Marxist doctrine,
that it should tend to disappear and become less and less
restrictive in order that it should be able to call itself proletarian. 

It is certain that Lenin believed this trend to be
inevitable and that, in this particular sense, he has been
ignored. For more than thirty years the proletarian State
has shown no signs of progressive anemia. 

On the contrary, it seems to be enjoying increasing prosperity. 
Meanwhile, in a lecture at the Sverdlov University two years
later, under the pressure of outside events and interior
realities, Lenin spoke with a precision which left little
doubt about the indefinite continuation of the proletarian
super-State. “With this machine, or rather this weapon
[the State], we shall crush every form of exploitation, and
when there are no longer any possibilities of exploitation
left on earth, no more people owning land or factories, no
more people gorging themselves under the eyes of others
who are starving, when such things become impossible,
then and only then shall we cast this machine aside. Then
there will be neither State nor exploitation.” 

Therefore as long as there exists on earth, and no longer in a specific
society, one single oppressed person and one proprietor, so
long the State will continue to exist. It also will be obliged
to increase in strength during this period so as to vanquish
 one by one the injustices, the governments responsible for injustice, 
the obstinately bourgeois nations, and the people who are blind to 
their own interests. 

And when, on an earth that has finally been subdued and
purged of enemies, the final iniquity shall have been
drowned in the blood of the just and the unjust, then the
State, which has reached the limit of all power, a monstrous
idol covering the entire earth, will be discreetly
absorbed into the silent city of Justice.

Under the easily predictable pressure of adverse
imperialism, the imperialism of justice was born, in reality
with Lenin. But imperialism, even the imperialism of
justice, has no other end but defeat or world empire. Until
then it has no other means but injustice. From now on,
the doctrine is definitively identified with the prophecy.
For the sake of justice in the far-away future, it authorizes
injustice throughout the entire course of history and becomes 
the type of mystification which Lenin detested more
than anything else in the world. It contrives the acceptance 
of injustice, crime, and falsehood by the promise of
a miracle. Still greater production, still more power,
 uninterrupted labor, incessant suffering, permanent war, and
then a moment will come when universal bondage in the
totalitarian empire will be miraculously changed into its
‘opposite: free leisure in a universal republic.

Pseudo-revolutionary mystification has now acquired a formula: all
freedom must be crushed in order to conquer the empire,
and one day the empire will be the equivalent of freedom.
And so the way to unity passes through totality.

Totality and Trials

Totality is, in effect, nothing other than the ancient
dream of unity common to both believers and rebels, but
projected horizontally onto an earth deprived of God. To
denounce every value, therefore, amounts to renouncing
rebellion in order to accept the Empire and slavery. 

Criticism of formal values cannot pass over the concept of freedom. 
Once the impossibility has been recognized of creating, by means of 
the forces of rebellion alone, the free individual of whom the romantics
 dreamed, freedom itself has also been incorporated in the movement of history. 

It has become freedom fighting for existence, which, in
order to exist, must create itself. Identified with the dynamism 
of history, it cannot play its proper role until history comes to 
a stop, in the realization of the Universal
City. Until then, every one of its victories will lead to an
antithesis that will render it pointless. The German nation 
frees itself from its oppressors, but at the price of the
freedom of every German. The individuals under a totalitarian 
regime are not free, even though man in the collective sense is free. 
Finally, when the Empire delivers the
entire human species, freedom will reign over herds of
faves, who at least will be free in relation to God and,