
blast away all delay, all duration, and that historical science
would soon open up to a new tempo, a pace which

should, at some stage not too far distant, speed up even the —
‘truth’ of history:

In other words, globalization relates to the dromospheric
greenhouse effect of confinement within the limit-acceleration, a
tion of telecommunications. . a - L

‘The time of the finite world is beginning, declared
Paul Valéry as early as the 1920s. With the 1980s, the A,
world of finite time began. In the face of this sudden
ending of all localized durée, the acceleration of history is
running up against the barrier of real time.

After the discovery, in the eighteenth century, of the
deep time of those millions of years required for the geological 
concretion of the planet which bears us, we have
today the invention of this surface time of the dromological
reality-effect of remote action. .

The matter-time of the hard geophysical reality of places
gives way to this light-time of a virtual reality which modifies 
the very truth of all durée, thereby provoking, with the
time accident, the acceleration of all reality: of things,
living beings, socio-cultural phenomena.

What are we to say, for example, of the ‘virtual communities’ 
organized in networks around the Internet?
There are already 70 million Internet users throughout the
world, communities of believers ‘tele-present’ one to another
thanks to the instantaneity — and, before long, the electronic 
ubiquity — of on-line cameras. 

What, then, remains of the historical importance of the 
public space of the city in the era of this META-CITY in Sf
which the public image is king? An interactive image in
commerce, education and the post-industrial enterprise,
available at all times — and from one end to the other of our
small planet.

Just as, a quarter of a century ago, when Einstein
put forward his relativist equations, human beings
gave up understanding the overall physical context in
which they live, we can see them today giving up
understanding the overall political context in which
their lives unfold.

What are we to say, at the end of the twentieth century,
in the age of globalization, of this refusal of understanding,
other than that it is going on before our very eyes, with the
decline of the nation-state and the discrete revival in new
forms of politics by the media, by the multi-media constituted 
by these networks and screens which show us the
acceleration of time; the multi-media of that ‘real time’ of
interchanges which performs the relativistic feat of compressing 
the ‘real space’ of the globe through the temporal
compression of information and images of the world?

Henceforth, here no longer exists; everything is now. The end
of our history has not happened, but we do have the programmed
 end of the ‘hic et nunc’ and the ‘in situ’.

The globalization of trade is not, then, economic, as has .
been the constant refrain since the development of the
single market; it is, primarily, ecological and relates not
merely to the pollution of substances, with, for example,
the greenhouse effect in the atmosphere, but also to the
pollution of distances and delays which make up the
world of concrete experience.