

Creativity and the Sociocultural Environment

Scientific equipment or to material such as marble, iron, wood, paint
and so on for artistic work. 

Thus one may reasonably conclude that political leaders who
wish to further creativity must promote the existence and growth of
cultural media. Some legislators and politicians who are to
 provide assistance to the indigent or to recommend utilitarian 
works such as roads and highways are often deaf to cultural needs, however.

Obviously that which ensures survival comes first: but cultural media
ie should not be considered a luxury as some Roman emperors thought: 
Taste such media are indispensible for the growth of civilization.
mu The second characteristic of a creativogenic culture—difficult to
distinguish from the first, at times—is openness to cultural stimuli. In
other words, the cultural stimuli and milieus must not only be
present, they must also be requested, desired, made easily available.
Openness on the part of the population generally turns into real receptivity. 

A creativogenic culture must be concerned with more than
such positive goals as safety, security, and the preservation of the
physical environment. It must not focus exclusively or excessively on
only one aspect of human life, whether that be religion, militarism,
comfort, sensuousness, or something else. For instance, a society ike
the one prevailing in Europe in the Middle Ages—especially in that
part of the Middle Ages called the Dark Ages—was not characterized
by openness to various cultural stimuli. Cultural media were available
only to a few people, generally the clergy, and they concerned themselves 
only with the salvation of the soul. Geniuses were rare then
and those that appeared made contributions almost exclusively to
theological philosophy (Thomas Aquinas) or to the practice of religious 
life (Francis of Assisi).

The third creativogenic characteristic is stress on becoming, not just
on being. A culture that puts emphasis only on immediate gratification
sensuousness, comfort, and immediate pleasure does not promote
creativity. The contrast between being and becoming that some cultural
trends emphasize, with the understanding that only being counts because 
tomorrow is to be distrusted, is unwarranted and harmful. At a
human level, becoming is part of being. Mature man is always becoming
because he 1s constantly affected by a universe of changing symbols
Today he is somewhat different from the way he was yesterday and
tomorrow he will be different from the way he is today. He listens,



The Creativogenic Society

reads, learns, feels; he observes daily events that are personal or collective, 
private or public, scientific or experiential, practical or theoretical, rational
 or irrational, moral or immoral. The creative man is conscious of the fact that 
creativity is something that grows, has duration, and requires the future as 
well as the present. Becoming does not mean losing, or failing to acquire a 
self-identity. It also does not mean that the creative person must give up 
sensuousness or immediate gratification or the beauty of the moment. 
But if the beauty of the fleeting moment is to predispose a person to creativity, 
it must be perceived as a recurring if not a universal beauty. In experiencing it, 
the creative person has become what he now is; being and becoming must be 
experienced together. A society that promotes nothing but being will lead
to decadence and not to growth.

The fourth characteristic of a creativogenic culture is free access to
cultural media for all citizens, without discrimination. \t is well known that
throughout history, cultural media have been made available only to a
limited group of people. The privileged class at times was the aristocracy, 
at times the clergy, at times the wealthy bourgeoisie, at times
the religious or ethnic majority, and, almost always, predominantly
the male sex. The groups discriminated against were often allowed to
be influenced by the cultural media, or to obtain a smattering awareness 
of them, but they were seldom permitted to advance beyond a
simple education or encouraged to proceed toward creativity.

If we scan any list of geniuses, we are immediately struck by the
fact that men outnumber women by far. Must we conclude that
women are inferior to men in the field of creativity? Many people
believe so, and have believed so for many centuries; and they are
allegedly supported by statistics. But statisticians know that numbers
cannot be accepted at face value. They have to be interpreted. There
is in fact no biological basis for this alleged inferiority of women in the
field of creativity. Men and women differ anatomically and physiologically 
in some of their organs, endocrine glands, muscles, and bones;
but these differences cannot serve to explain different performances so
far as creativity is concerned. The only part of the organism that could
physiologically explain the difference would be the central nervous
system. But no researcher has thus far detected any differences in the
central nervous systems of the two sexes that do so. The average adult
human brain weighs about 1,400 grams, or approximately 2 percent of
the total body weight. Inasmuch as women generally weigh less than

