

The many different sizes and types of buoys meet a wide range of
environmental conditions and user requirements. The principal types
of buoys used by the United States are lighted, lighted sound, unlighted
sound, and unlighted. Some examples of these are illustrated here.

A lighted buoy consists of a floating hull with a tower on which a
lantern is mounted. Batteries to power the light are contained in special
pockets in the buoy hull. To keep the buoy in an upright, stable post
tion, a large counterweight may extend from a tube below the surface
of the water. A radar reflector may form part of the buoy tower.

Lighted sound buoys have the same general configuration as light
buoys but are equipped with either a gong, bell, whistle, or electronic
horn. Bells and gongs on buoys are sounded by tappers that hang from
the tower and swing as the buoys roll in the sea. Bell buoys produce
sound of only one tone, gong buoys produce several tones.

Whistle buoys make a loud moaning sound that is caused by the
rising and falling motions of the buoy in the sea. A sound buoy equipped
with an electronic horn produces a pure tone at regular intervals and
operates continually regardless of the sea state. .

Unlighted sound buoys have the same general appearance as lighted:
buoys (except for old whistles) but are not equipped with lights.

Unlighted (soundless) buoys have either a can or a nun shape. Can
buoys have a cylindrical shape whereas nun buoys have a conical sha ne
usually located on top of a cylindrical shape. .

Buoys are floating aids that require moorings to hold them in posh
tion. Typically, the mooring consists of chain and a large concre ¢
sinker. Because buoys are subjected to waves, wind, and tides, h
scope of the moorings will normally be about three times the depth of
the water, and the buoy can be expected to swing in a circle as the
current, wind, and wave conditions change.

Fallibility of Buoys

Buoys aren’t always where you expect them to be. Anything tha’
floats in water can be moved by water, and it would be imprudent 0
expect floating aids to always maintain their charted positions and to
constantly and unerringly display their advertised characteristics. The
Coast Guard does its best but nobody’s perfect.

The buoy symbol shown on charts indicates the approximate position of the 
buoy body and the sinker that secures the buoy to the seabed,
The approximate position is used because of practical limitations in
placing and keeping buoys and their sinkers in exact geographical location