
The School of Dreams

distracted, and absentmindedly read what is happening while waiting for
the appointed time. Then we look at our watches and it’s page 200. At
last the meeting takes place. At a given moment, the old art critic says to
the narrator: You must be wondering why I had you come today, at this
hour? I will tell you but not right away. We’re on page 220 in the
museum room. Then the old critic asks the narrator if he wouldn’t like
to go to the theater with him that evening, because he has a seat. So the
narrator says to himself: That’s why he had me come! And we say: So
we’ve read this entire book just to go to the theater! But what time is it?
Then the other one says: Well, it’s time to go, we must go quickly to the
theater, they’re playing “The Broken Jug” by Kleist. They hurry out.
There are only two pages left. They hardly have time to see the play,
which was a flop. And so it’s over.

I adored this book. Genuine books are always like that: the site, the
bed, the hope of another book. The whole time you were expecting to
read the book, you were reading another book. The book in place of the
book. What is the book written while you are preparing to write a book?
There is no appointment with writing other than the one we go to
wondering what we’re doing here and where we're going. Meanwhile,
our whole life passes through us and suddenly we’re outside. Previously
it wasn’t the custom to write this kind of book. Writing the book
obliquely. One didn’t allow oneself to write the book that wasn’t announced and let the space and time of the book be invaded by a totally
unexpected book. A unique literary stroke of genius in this respect is
Sterne’s Tristram Shandy.

Writing giving in to itself: this is what happens in O Lustro. This
book has neither beginning nor end. It is a place. It is what dreams teach
us: not to be afraid of not being the driver, since it is frightening, when
we write, to find ourselves riding a crazy book. The book writes itself,
and if by chance the person opposite should ask you what you are writing,
you have nothing to say since you don’t know., Yet the book is written
only if it has an engine. A book that writes itself and carries you on
board must have an engine even if you don’t know how it works,
otherwise it will break down.

The School of Dreams

I Like Dream Writers

Tsvetaeva, Kafka, Clarice Lispector, Genet, Ingeborg Bachmann are all
dreamers: sleepwalking scribes. I never really questioned the relationship
to dreams of the authors I love. When I began to do this it turned out
that they were all dreamers. What also transpired was just how much
most books are outside dreams, how they avoid and resist dreams. It is
surprising that there should be this refusal of such an important apn
Wondering if “classical” writing hadn’t prevented dreams, if there wasn’t,
in French literature for instance, a generalized distrust regarding dreamed
productions, the only great dream I found going back through the
centuries was Athaliah’s well-known dream in Racine, a real dream
around which everything is organized, rather as in The Captain's Daugh-

ter.

Each of you lend me an attentive ear.

I would not call to mind the past, nor would
I give account unto you for the blood

That I have shed. . .

.. . A dream (why should a dream
trouble me?) all my heart with fear imbues.

.. . but then, forgetting care,

His sweet charm and his noble, modest air
I was admiring, suddenly I felt

A murderous blade, which to the very hilt
The traitor buried in my heart*’

Everything is organized by the dream’s power and something specif
ically tragic: an uncertainty; must we pay attention to the dream or not!
There is a battle with the dream. Athaliah is a character of the unconscious, a rare character. She is surrounded by characters who belong, on
the contrary, to the conscious scene. This discrepancy produces tragic
effects. The contents of the dream are brutal: the dream stages the