
> Production Leveling

In business, nothing is more pleasing than customer orders.
With the labor dispute over and the special demands of the
Korean War beginning, a lively tension filled the production
plant. How would we handle the demand for trucks? People in
the production plant were frantic.

There was a shortage of everything from crude materials to
parts. We could not get things in the quantity or at the time
needed. Our parts suppliers were also short on equipment
and manpower.

Because Toyota made chassis, when many parts did not arrive on time 
or in the right amounts, assembly work was delayed. For this reason,
 we could not do assembly during the first half of the month. 
We were forced to gather the parts that were arriving intermittently 
and irregularly and do the assembly work at the end of the month. 
Like the old song “dekansho” that tells of sleeping half the year, 
this was dekansho production
and the approach nearly did us in.

If a part is needed at the rate of 1,000 per month, we should
make 40 parts a day for 25 days. Furthermore, we should
spread production evenly throughout the workday. If the
workday is 480 minutes, we should average one piece every 12
minutes. This idea later developed into production leveling.

Establishing (1) a production flow and (2) a way to maintain
a constant supply of raw materials from outside for parts to be
machined was the way the Toyota, or Japanese, production
system should be operated. Our minds were filled with ideas.

Because there were shortages of everything, we must have
thought it all right to increase manpower and machines 
to produce and store items. At the time, we were making no more
than 1,000 to 2,000 cars a month, and keeping a one-month inventory
 in each process. Except for needing a large
warehouse, this did not seem too big a burden. We did foresee
a big problem, however, if and when production increased.

To avoid this potential problem, we looked for ways to
level all production. We wanted to get away from having to
produce everything around the end of the month, so we
started by looking inside Toyota itself. Then, when outside
suppliers were needed, we first listened to their needs and then
asked them to cooperate in helping us achieve leveled production.
 Depending on the situation, we discussed the supplier’s
cooperation in terms of manpower, materials, and money.

> In the Beginning, There Was Need

So far, I have described, in sequence, the fundamental principles 
of the Toyota production system and its basic structure. I
would like to emphasize that it was realized because there were
always clear purposes and needs.

I strongly believe that “necessity is the mother of invention.” 
Even today, improvements at Toyota plants are made
based on need. The key to progress in production improvement,
I feel, is letting the plant people feel the need.

Even my own efforts to build the Toyota production system
block by block were also based on the strong need to discover
anew production method that would eliminate waste and help
us catch up with America in three years.

For example, the idea of a later process going to an earlier
process to pick up materials resulted from the following circumstance. 
In the conventional system, an earlier process forwarded products to a 
later process continuously regardless of
the production requirements of that process. Mountains of
parts, therefore, might pile up at the later process. At that
point, workers spent their time looking for storage space and
hunting for parts instead of making progress in the most important 
part of their jobs — production.


Somehow this waste had to be eliminated and it meant immediately 
stopping the automatic forwarding of parts from
earlier processes. This strong need made us change our method.

Rearranging the machines on the floor to establish a production 
flow eliminated the waste of storing parts. It also helped
us achieve the “one operator, many processes” system and increased 
production efficiency two and three times.

I already mentioned that in America this system could not