EverY EXPERIENCE HAS SOMETHING TO OFFER

He takes you right to the core of a scene. Georgia O'Keeffe
does the same thing with her flowers and spaces. But even in the highly
complex paintings that we see in galleries and museums, their creation
probably involved many eliminations.

“Rubbing out” and “painting over” are essential techniques for
every artist. Practice these skills by covering a surface randomly with
oil pastels, which are one of the most receptive media to being covered
by other colors, Eliminate sections of the picture by randomly covering
them with different colors. Notice how much easier it is to go from
light to dark. Use your finger to rub out areas and create different
kinds of atmospheric effects through the merging of colors.

As you work in this way, try to think very little about what the overall 
composition looks like. Let the total expression emerge from your
actions. Keep experimenting with the process of elimination and realize 
how each deletion simultaneously adds something new. As every
door closes, a new one opens. There is an ebb and flow to the process.

Your objective in this exercise is to experience how covering and
eliminating create new shapes and compositions. I like to scribble over
sections of oil pastel drawings with soft ebony pencils. The black lines
take on an intriguing new life in relation to the colors of the pastels,
which are similarly enriched through contrast with the lines. Try to
think exclusively about what the materials are doing and very little
about the end product. This type of experimentation will add significantly 
to your repertoire of expressive gestures and ultimately help
you to produce more satisfying pictures. But for the moment immerse
yourself in discovering what the materials do.

Some people might prefer to look at the process of getting to the
core of an expression from the positive perspective of construction,
while others prefer elimination. “Erasing” is a technique that reaches
back into our childhood experiences. Try covering a heavy-quality
paper surface with charcoal or with marks from a soft pencil that you
spread with your fingers. Make an image by erasing areas.

Gesso is a multidimensional painting medium. It is used to prime
canvas or any other painting surface, and you can use it to paint over
sections of a picture. Cover a canvas, board, or paper with paint in a
random fashion. Use different colors or limit yourself to two or three.
Randomly cover parts of the surface with Gesso and watch for the
shapes that emerge in the colored areas as well as the new white forms
created by the Gesso.

Another expressive gesture that is based on elimination and addition
is “building” the surface of the painting, as I described earlier. As you
apply colors on top of one another, you “build” the image.

Many artists prepare surfaces with thick mediums and then add sand
and other substances toenhance texture. Try working in this way as a
purely sensual experience, like a child playing at the beach. You will
discover how different surface qualities affect the appearance of an
image.

Attach layers of paper on a Masonite or plywood surface with glue.
Add scrapes of cloth and other materials that will adhere and vary the
appearance of the surface. Keep pasting the materials on top of one
another with the goal of making a sculptural relief. Cover the surface
with gesso or a latex primer from the hardware store. As you work, you
will experience how every addition eliminates what went before. The
forward-moving process of expression requires deletion. Think of your
previous gestures as contributions to building the image.

In the artistic process and in daily life, it is always challenging to
eliminate and let go. Today’s foreground becomes tomorrow’s background.

‘Whenever we abstract an essence from a life situation or perception,
we simplify, select, and delete. Edward Hopper’s paintings offer vivid
illustrations of this process. The artist sees configurations of shapes
and colors in nature, and he conveys these perceptions in his paintings
by elimination as well as through positive presentation.

Look at your surrounding environment with the goal of abstracting
essential elements. In order to do this, you have to look beyond details
and discover structural underpinnings. Drawing and painting from
nature require the ability to distill fundamental forms and to let
others go.