


/_ In my painting studios I observe how people benefit by first “warm- 
spent exercising our creative expression results in the ability to move
"ing up” the creative process through free body movement. They without self-consciousness. We respond instinctively and spontanestretch their bodies and e plore a wide range of gestures without being ously to the mood of the moment, which is comprised of many contrib-
. < I concerned with what they look like. Movement exercises help us to uting factors from the environment and from within ourselves.
I draw on the total expression of the body. As you move, become aware We've all experienced moments of synchronicity when all of the
) of the forces generated by your lower body. Imagine yourself painting pieces of our experience fall together in magical ways. The person who
I freely ona large canvas, and feel how much your feet and legs give to you have not seen for years calls you on the telephone the Str
' your gestures, One of the most crippling inhibitions to artistic expres- you are writing something about him in your story; the missing tool h _
sion is the blockage of the full Spectrum of the body’s expressive facul- mysteriously appears in your studio just as you need it. These moments : a
ties, which Support one another in an interdependent way. demonstrate how experience and creation do not always move accord: ‘y

Trusting the Process is based on the realization that creation isa ing to linear causation. C. G. Jung observed that events and 7elquon
complex interaction of many elements that collectively shape the fu- ships often take shape according to “acasual” patterns. If we persist in
ture. We have grown so accustomed to the creation myth of an individ- our creative efforts, surprisi ions will appear when they are sy
ual intelligence acting alone that we find it difficult to see the deeper ) least expected. The creative discipline involves the ability to keep the on
ecology of creation. I paint together with the expressive movements ~ field of activity open and responsive to what arrives. ; .
and gestures that I have adopted through years of practice. And when These moments of ease are preceded by unavoidable periods of
I succeed in my expression, it is because the movements within myself Sisyphean labor during which I confront an all-too-familiar on es
and those within my environment work together to generate an off- despair and worthlessness, feelings that on better days Tsee as part of
spring that carries the traces of our collaboration. the process.” Creativity cannot flourish band reach its deepest potential ,

In the real world of creation there are many solitary moments of ) without the participation of its demons as well as its angels. _ Pekez

II illumination, but the creator is always a participant in a field of action, The “process” has an intelligence that can be trusted, and the gift I
Creation is a complex interplay. I can never move in isolation from the of creation is the ability to work with it. Envisioning the basis of cre- I
Contributing forces of the immediate environment, ; ation as spontaneous movement suggests that the most fundamental _//

In previous epochs it was assumed that individual actions were mani- : discipline involves keeping the channels for expression open and refestations of a collective creation. The artisans and artists who con- sponsive to what is moving within us and within our environments. La
structed the Gothic cathedrals and the anonymous artists of tribal nang Ot t vy
culture contributed to a more comprehensive Purpose than individual Wer . 7
expression, em