

The ancient principle of similarities is based on the realization that
actions in one sphere influence events in corresponding areas. We are
once again realizing that everything is connected and that creation
requires an ability to move in sync with the interplay.

Imagine yourself as a leader of “a creative organization” that exists
within your personal experience. When you take on the role of coordinator 
of the dynamic interplay, you are less likely to be dominated by
a single aspect. You realize that you need all of the different contributors
and you avoid attachment to one “department.” 

In our daily lives we easily take on the role of advocating a particular 
point of view and do not realize how this attachment interrupts the deeper 
ecology of creation. It is more challenging to establish empathy with all 
of the participants in a situation.

For example, I watch young art students become so attached to creating a 
representational likeness that they overlook the movement, textures, 
spontaneous gestures, and compositional interactions that constitute 
a successful picture. A one-sided orientation to spontaneous
and primal gesture may be equally problematic. A successful picture is
always an orchestration of waned pane.

While making spontaneous painting , give différent personalities
to your gestures. Let the big and domimant lines or brushes interact
with the tiny and sensitive ones. Empathize with each gesture as you
make it. Cn

Introduce the expressive roles into your picture—the bold and aggressive one, 
the shy and hiding one, the playful and joyous character,
the serious and calculating type, the quick and jumpy line, the relaxed
and steady stroke. Personifying your gestures will add yet another dimension 
to your improvisations and help you access novel expressions.
Imagining your different gestures as “persons” is a poetic way of 
thinking that is the basis of empathy.

You can also experiment with these character “types” in your vocal
improvisations, body movements, drumming exercises, and other
forms of creative practice. The range of characters serve you as 
expressive allies. They help you to forget yourself and to work as though an
autonomous force is moving through you.

Don’t worry about “losing” yourself as you create. The self conscious 
personal identity is only one of many aspects that live within a
person. There are many more expressive roles available to us. Artists
speak fondly of the poetic madness that possesses them in their most
inspired moments. In order to create freely we need to get beyond
our self-consciousness and especially beyond the attitude that we have
limited gifts of expression.

If you tend toward order in your daily actions, experiment with the
expressive chaos and imbalance, If you are generally impulsive in your
habitual ways, focus for a while on orderly and calculated movements,

‘Try to access unfamiliar roles. There is tremendous energy in whatever
is antithetical to the norm.

In my painting studios I often encourage people to respond to the
pictures they make through creative movement and vocal improvisations. 
Although silent contemplation is always the most natural and
primary way of looking at art, we find that bodily expressions enlarge
and sharpen perceptions. When we interpret creative expressions with
more of the same, and through other expressive modalities, we become
immersed in the process and the energy of the artworks. In contrast to
these artistic responses, I have observed how verbal explanations tend
to distance me from the images. However, a poem, a story, or a dramatic 
improvisation, just like movement and vocal expression, will
heighten the impact of another artwork. Creative responses to artistic
expressions and life experiences almost universally draw us closer to
them.

As you begin to work with new movements and roles, give them
plenty of time and sustained practice. Nothing will sink in and become
an ally unless you stay with it and move through all of the predictable
“approach and avoidance” phases of a new relationship.

To orchestrate the varied contributors to the créative process, we
need what I call the discipline of flexibility. Many people are able to
change quickly and move in new directions, but their actions are not