
THE WELLSPRING OF MOVEMENT 

respective parts in a collective creation. This is what I describe as the
“complex” of creativity, a condition that feels as though the individual 
The process of art can be likened to a long-term relationship in , °°
which we grow to understand and accept what we like and dislike. I‘ ~

Almost every aspect of our experience has its disturbing qualities that I 
can never describe how it happened but ultimately shape the course of the 
creative process if we stay open to their formative influences. 

As the artist makes them over and over, new qualities emerge
from the familiar basis of expression. What might appear to some é
bea monotonous drill becomes the springboard for new levels of 
exPressive integration. Repetition provides the basis for new 
combinations of gestures and flights of imagination. After extended I periods~
of playing with familiar gestures, complete compositions will emerge
spontaneously. It is like a child learning to read: the process cannot be —
explained according to a linear Sequence of acts. It occurs magical
but upon the foundation of focused exercise and preparation. All of the
pieces, the good and the bad, play vital roles in the creative act. 
However, when we reflect back upon these enchanted moments of creation,
we are apt to look more upon the specific turning points and less upon
the all-encompassing collection of movements that generate a cumulative effect.
to me.

I have also grown to appreciate the creative role of what may first
appear to be routine gestures. These familiar motions and forms are
always connected to our individual and natural ways of expressing ourselves. 
Just as the child described how she always begins her pictures
with ideas about her favorite things, we can begin to exercise creative
expression with favorite gestures that we use over and over again.
When I first watched films of Picasso painting and drawing, I was
struck by his fluid lines and graceful body movement. He used every
part of his body to achieve a total expression. The gestures on paper
and canvas extended from his stance and lower body motions as much
as his hand and arm. We don’t realize how the expressiveness of our >
paintings and drawings correspond completely to the way in which we
move our bodies. Art is close to dance, and our paintings will benefit }
as we expand our abilities to move with materials. In order to paint ~
effectively I need to commit myself to exercise with brushes, pencils,
oil sticks, and other implements of expression. Each device, like a new

Each of us finds our personal basis for exercising creative expression.
An experienced art teacher observed, “The biggest problem for
adults and children is that everyone wants quick results, They don’t
realize that you have to work at it. They have to spend time at it and
be patient. It’s a commitment.”

with them is internalized and I feel increasingly comfortable and secure
in making these movements. If I make a drawing of a human figure or
a landscape, I move with the same spontaneity that characterized my
exercise, and the resulting pictures show a unique mixture of my expressive gesture and the subject matter I am painting.