What had produced the illusion, the elusive flickering
candlelight, coupled with the dim, though now less dim, 
electric light, or some correspondence, maybe, as Geoff liked to put
it, between the subnormal world and the abnormally. suspicious? 
How the Consul had delighted in the absurd game too:
sortes Shakespeareanae ...And what wonders I have done all
Germany can witness. Enter Wagner, sacrement, van sugar, almonds,
cambrick, end alle dingen, towsand, towsand ding. M. Laruelle closed 
the book on Dekker’s comedy, then, in the face of the barman who was 
watching him, stained disheloth over his arm, with quiet amazement, 
shut his eyes, and Opening the book again twirled one finger in the air, 
and brought it down firmly upon a passage he now held up to the
light:

Cut ts the branch that might have grown full straight,
And burned is Apollo’s laurel bough,

That sometime grew within this learned man,
Faustus is gone: regard his hellish fall—

Shaken, M. Laruelle replaced the book on the table, closing it
with the fingers and thumb of one hand, while with the other
hand he reached to the floor for a folded sheet of paper that had
fluttered out of it. He picked the paper up between two fingers
and unfolded it, turning it over. Hotel Bella Vista, he read. There
were really two sheets of uncommonly thin hotel notepaper that
had been pressed flat in the book, long but narrow and crammed
on both sides with marginless writing in pencil. At first glance it
did not appear a letter. But there was no mistaking, even in the
uncertain light, the hand, half crabbed, half generous, and
wholly drunken, of the Consul himself, the Greek e’s, flying 
buttresses of d’s, the t’s like lonely wayside crosses save where they
crucified an entire word, the words themselves slanting steeply
downhill, though the individual characters seemed as if resisting
the descent, braced, climbing the other way. M. Laruelle felt a
qualm. For he saw now that it was indeed a letter of sorts,
though one that the writer undoubtedly had little intention, 
possibly no capability for the further tactile effort, of posting:

Ge gaan SPs Night: and once again, the nightly grapple with
death, the room shaking with daemonic orchestras, the snatches
of fearful sleep, the voices outside the window, my name being
continually repeated with scorn by imaginary parties arriving, the
dark’s spinets. As if there were not enough real noises in these
nights the color of grey hair. Not like the rendin tumult of
American cities, the noise of the unbandaging of great giants in
agony. But the howling Pariah dogs, the cocks that herald dawn
all night, the drumming, the moaning that will be found later
white plumage huddled on telegraph wires in back gardens or
fowl roosting in apple trees, the eternal sorrow that never sleeps
of great Mexico. For myself I like to take My sorrow into the
shadow of old monasteries, my guilt into cloisters and under tapestries, 
and into the misericordes of unimaginable cantinas
Where sad-faced potters and legless beggars drink at dawn, whose
cold jonquil beauty one rediscovers in death. So that when you
left, Yvonne, I went to Oaxaca. There is no sadder word, Shall I
tell you, Yvonne, of the terrible journey there through the desert
over the narrow gauge railway on the rack of a third-class carriage bench,
 the child whose life its mother and I saved by rubbing its belly with 
tequila out of my bottle, or of how, when I went to my room in the hotel 
where we once were happy, the noise of slaughtering below in the kitchen 
drove me out into the glare of the street, and later, that night, there 
was a vulture sitting in the washbasin? Horrors portioned to a giant nerve! 

No, my secrets are of the grave and must be kept. And this is how I sometimes 
think G Mysci, as a great explorer who has discovered
Some extraordinary land from which he can never return to give
his knowledge to the world: but the name of this land is hell.

It is not Mexico of course but in the heart. And to-day I was
in Quauhnahuac as usual when I received from my lawyer news
of our divorce. This was as I invited it. I received other news too:
England is breaking off diplomatic relations with Mexico and all