

their delicious names for the months. Pop. Uo. Zip. Zotz. Tzec.
Xul. Yaxkin.”

“Mac,” Yvonne was laughing: “Isn’t there one called Mac?”

“There’s Yax and Zac. And Uayeb: I like that one most of all,
the month that only lasts five days.”

“In receipt of yours dated Zip the first! —”

“But where does it all get you in the end?” The Consul sipped
his strychnine that had yet to prove its adequacy as a chaser to the
Burke’s Irish (now perhaps in the garage at the Bella Vista). “The
knowledge, I mean. One of the first penances I ever imposed on
myself was to learn the philosophical section of War and Peace by
heart. That was of course before I could dodge about in the rigging 
of the Cabbala like a St. Jago’s monkey. But then the other
day I suddenly realised that the only thing I remembered about
the whole book was that Napoleon’s leg twitched—”

“Aren't you going to eat anything yourself? You must be
starved.”

“T partook.”

Yvonne who was herself breakfasting heartily asked:

“How’s the market?”

“Tom’s a bit fed up because they’ve confiscated some property
of his in Tlaxcala, or Puebla, he thought he’d got away with.
They haven’t my number yet, ’'m not sure where I really do stand
in that regard, now I’ve resigned the service—”

“So you—”

“By the by I must apologise for still being in these duds—
dusty too—bad show, I might have put on a blazer at least for
your benefit!” The Consul smiled inwardly at his accent, now become for 
undivulgeable reasons almost uncontrolledly “English.”

“So you really have resigned!”

“Oh absolutely! Pm thinking of becoming a Mexican subject,
of going to live among the Indians, like William Blackstone. But
for one’s habit of making money, don’t you know, all very mysterious to you, 
I suppose, outside looking in—” The Consul stared round mildly at the pictures 
on the wall, mostly watercolours by his mother depicting scenes in Kashmir: 
a small grey stone enclosure encompassing several birch trees and a taller
poplar was Lalla Rookh’s tomb, a picture of wild torrential
scenery, vaguely Scottish, the gorge, the ravine at Gugganvir; the
Shalimar looked more like the Cam than ever: a distant view of
Nanga Parbat from Sind valley could have been painted on the
porch here, Nanga Parbat might well have passed for old
Popo . . . “—outside looking in,” he repeated, “the result of so
much worry, speculation, foresight, alimony, seigniorage—”

“But—” Yvonne had laid aside her breakfast tray and taken a
cigarette from her own case beside the bed and lit it before the
Consul could help her.

“One might have already done so!”

Yvonne lay back in bed smoking. . . In the end the Consul
scarcely heard what she was saying—calmly, sensibly, courageously—
for his awareness of an extraordinary thing that was
happening in his mind. He saw in a flash, as if these were ships
on the horizon, under a black lateral abstract sky, the occasion for
desperate celebration (it didn’t matter he might be the only one
to celebrate it) receding, while at the same time, coming closer,

"what could only be, what was=Good God! —his salvation . . .

“Now?” he found he had said gently. “But we can’t very well
go away ow can we, what with Hugh and you and me and one
thing and another, don’t you think? It’s a little unfeasible, isn’t
it?” (For his salvation might not have seemed so large with menace 
had not the Burke’s Irish whiskey chosen suddenly to tighten,
if almost imperceptibly, a screw. It was the soaring of this moment, 
conceived of as continuous, that felt itself threatened.)
“Isn’t it?” he repeated.

“I’m sure Hugh’d understand—”

“But that’s not quite the point!”

“Geoffrey, this house has become somehow evil—”

“—J] mean it’s rather a dirty trick—”

Oh Jesus ... The Consul slowly assumed an expression intended to 
be slightly bantering and at the same time assured, indicative of 
a final consular sanity. For this was it. Goethe’s
church bell was looking him straight between the eyes; fortu-