


of his mescal, and resumed reading. He could not remember
whether he had paid or not.—“Oh Geoffrey, how bitterly I regret it now. 
Why did we postpone it? Is it too late? I want your
children, soon, at once, I want them. I want your life filling and
stirring me. I want your happiness beneath my heart and your
sorrows in my eyes and your peace in the fingers of my hand—”
The Consul paused, what was she saying? He rubbed his eyes,
then fumbled for his cigarettes: Alas; the tragic word droned
round the room like a bullet that had passed through him. He
read on, smoking;—“You are walking on the edge of an abyss
where I may not follow. I wake to a darkness in which I must follow 
myself endlessly, hating the I who so eternally pursues and
confronts me. If we could rise from Our misery, seek each other
once more, and find again the solace of each other’s lips and eyes.
Who is to stand between? Who can prevent?”

The Consul stood up— Yvonne had certainly been reading
something —bowed to the old woman, and went out into the bar
he’d imagined filling up behind him, but which was still fairly deserted. 
Who indeed was to stand between? He posted himself at
the door again, as sometimes before in the deceptive violet dawn:
who indeed could Prevent? Once more he stared at the square.
The same ragged platoon of soldiers still seemed to be crossin g it,
as in some disrupted movie repeating itself. The corporal still
toiled at his copperplate handwriting under the archway, only his
lamp was alight. It was getting dark. The police were nowhere to
be seen. Though by the barranca the same soldier was still asleep
under a tree; or wasn’t it a soldier, but something else? He looked
away. Black clouds were boiling up again, there was a distant
breaking of thunder. He breathed the oppressive air in which
there was a slight hint of coolness. Who indeed, even now, was
to stand between? he thought desperately. Who indeed even now
could prevent? He wanted Yvonne at this moment, to take her in
his arms, wanted more than ever before to be forgiven, and to
forgive: but where should he go? Where would he find her now?
A whole unlikely family of indeterminate class were strolling past
the door: the grandfather in front, correcting his watch, peering