

He apologetically, disappointedly, lunged off down the street again.
They were all looking after him, and just as Hugh was wondering
whether the postman’s behaviour might not have been part of
some enormous inexplicable private joke, if really he’d been
laughing at them the whole time, though in the kindliest way, he
halted, fumbled once more at one of the packages, turned, and
trotting back with little yelps of triumph, handed the Consul
what looked like a postal card.

Yvonne, a little ahead again by now, nodded at him over her
shoulder, smiling, as to say: “Good, you’ve got a letter after all,”
and with her buoyant dancing steps walked on slowly beside M.
Laruelle, up the dusty hill.

The Consul turned the card over twice, then handed it to
Hugh.

“Strange—” he said.

—It was from Yvonne herself and apparently written at least a
year ago. Hugh suddenly realised it must have been posted soon
after she’d left the Consul and most probably in ignorance he
proposed to remain in Quauhnahuac. Yet curiously it was the
card that had wandered far afield: originally addressed to Wells
Fargo in Mexico City, it had been forwarded by some error
abroad, gone badly astray in fact, for it was date-stamped from
Paris, Gibraltar, and even Algeciras, in fascist Spain.

“No, read it,” the Consul smiled.

Yvonne’s scrawl ran: “Darling, why did I leave? Why did you let
me? Expect to arrive in the U.S. to-morrow, California two days later.
Hope to find a word from you there waiting. Love. Y.”

Hugh turned the card over. There was a picture of the leonine
Signal Peak on El Paso with Carlsbad Cavern Highway leading
over a white fenced bridge between desert and desert. The road
turned a little corner in the distance and vanished.

On the side of the drunken madly revolving world hurtling at 1:20
P.M. toward Hercules’ Butterfly the house seemed a bad idea, the
Consul thought—

There were two towers, Jacques’ zacualis, one at each end and
joined by a catwalk over the roof, which was the glassed-in gable
of the studio below. These towers were as if camouflaged (almost 
like the Samaritan, in fact): blue, grey, purple, vermilion,
had once been slashed on in zebra stripes. But time and weather
had combined to render the effect from a short distance of cuniform 
dull mauve. Their tops, reached from the catwalk by twin
wooden ladders, and from inside by two spiral staircases, made
two flimsy crenellated miradors, each scarcely larger than a bartizan, 
tiny roofless variants of the observation posts which everywhere 
commanded the valley in Quauhnahuac.

On the battlements of the mirador to their left, as the Consul
and Hugh confronted the house, with the Calle Nicaragua
stretching downhill to their right, now appeared to them two
bilious-looking angels. The angels, carved out of pink stone,
knelt facing one another in profile against the sky across the 
intervening crenels, while behind, upon corresponding merlons at the