They undoubtedly have no essential spiritual significance, and
although their presence makes his conversion more memorable to the convert, it has
never been proved that converts who show them are more persevering or fertile in good
fruits than those whose change of heart has had less violent accompaniments. On the
whole, unconsciousness, convulsions, visions, involuntary vocal utterances, and
suffocation, must be simply ascribed to the subject’s having a large subliminal region,
involving nervous instability. This is often the subject’s own view of the matter
afterwards. One of Starbuck’s correspondents writes, for instance: —

[138] Consult William B. Sprague: Lectures on Revivals of Religion, New York,
1832, in the long Appendix to which the opinions of a large number of ministers are
given.

“I have been through the experience which is known as conversion. My explanation
of it is this: the subject works his emotions up to the breaking point, at the same time
resisting their physical manifestations, such as quickened pulse, etc., and then suddenly
lets them have their full sway over his body. The relief is something wonderful, and the
pleasurable effects of the emotions are experienced to the highest degree.”

There is one form of sensory automatism which possibly deserves special notice on
account of its frequency. I refer to hallucinatory or pseudo-hallucinatory luminous
phenomena, photisms, to use the term of the psychologists. Saint Paul’s blinding
heavenly vision seems to have been a phenomenon of this sort; so does Constantine’s
cross in the sky. The last case but one which I quoted mentions floods of light and glory.
Henry Alline mentions a light, about whose externality he seems uncertain. Colonel
Gardiner sees a blazing light. President Finney writes: -

“All at once the glory of God shone upon and round about me in a manner almost
marvelous... A light perfectly ineffable shone in my soul, that almost prostrated me on
the ground.... This light seemed like the brightness of the sun in every direction. It was
too intense for the eyes.... I think I knew something then, by actual experience, of that
light that prostrated Paul on the way to Damascus. It was surely a light such as I could
not have endured long.”[139]

Such reports of photisms are indeed far from uncommon. Here is another from
Starbuck’s collection, where the light appeared evidently external: —

“I had attended a series of revival services for about two weeks off and on. Had
been invited to the altar several times, all the time becoming more deeply impressed,
when finally I decided I must do this, or I should be lost. Realization of conversion was
very vivid, like a ton’s weight being lifted from my heart; a strange light which seemed
to light up the whole room (for it was dark); a conscious supreme bliss which caused me
to repeat ‘Glory to God’ for a long time. Decided to be God’s child for life, and to give up
my pet ambition, wealth and social position. My former habits of life hindered my
growth somewhat, but I set about overcoming these systematically, and in one year my
whole nature was changed, i. e., my ambitions were of a different order.”

Here is another one of Starbuck’s cases, involving a luminous element: -

“I had been clearly converted twenty-three years before, or rather reclaimed. My
experience in regeneration was then clear and spiritual, and I had not backslidden. But I
experienced entire sanctification on the 15th day of March, 1893, about eleven o’clock in
the morning. The particular accompaniments of the experience were entirely
unexpected. I was quietly sitting at home singing selections out of Pentecostal Hymns.
Suddenly there seemed to be a something sweeping into me and inflating my entire
being - such a sensation as I had never experienced before.