

Mind/Body Link

Numerous experiments have revealed that our moods, including stress,
and our social contacts have an immediate impact on the level of activity
of our immune system, and hence our ability to counteract germs.

In the third stage of medicine, one of the frontiers of research will be to
explore this link using the tools of molecular biology. The mind/body
link, sometimes viewed by traditional medicine as bordering on quackery,
will soon reveal its secrets to molecular medicine, which will be able to
explore how the mind affects the immune system, and vice versa, at the
cellular and molecular level. In a sense, we are going full circle on the
mind/body link, except our understanding is at a much higher level.

Historically, one frustrating problem with exploring the mind/body
link has been the reliance on anecdotal data, which is notoriously subject
to extraneous effects, such as the placebo effect, the power of suggestion,
and subjective judgments. Without careful experiments, control groups,
and meticulous records, it becomes nearly impossible to verify the first 
person accounts of remarkable cures and remissions.

Within the last few years, however, there has been a flood of solid new
experiments and analyses which point to the existence of this mind/body
link. In 1996, a definitive study done at the Johns Hopkins School of
Hygiene and Public Health showed a link between heart attacks and
depression, Doctors followed 1,551 people for over thirteen years and
found that those who were depressed were four times as likely to have a
heart attack. In 1993, a landmark study of 752 men analyzed over a seven year 
period in Géteborg, Sweden, showed that men who exhibited unusual amounts of
 stress in their lives died at a rate three times greater
than those who were calm, showing a direct link between one’s longevity
and one’s emotional state. High levels of stress were, in fact, better
predictors of one’s death rate than high blood pressure, cholesterol, or
triglyceride levels.

But perhaps more interesting was the finding that for people who led a
full social life, with rich interactions with friends, wives, and family, there
was no relation between one’s life expectancy and one’s level of stress,
This indicated that social contact helped to assuage the effects of stress on
the body. Social isolation, in fact, has been shown to result in alarmingly
high death rates. (pve Ligh,

In 1991, scientists at Carnegie-Mellon University demonstrated how
stress can suppress the immune system’s response to colds. By deliberately
exposing students to cold viruses, they found that among students
with stress, 47 percent came down with colds, compared with only 27
percent of those without stress. :

By examining a subject’s blood several times a day, one can in fact find
a direct correlation between white blood cell activity and levels of stress.
Our immune system was shown to be, in a sense, a barometer to our
emotional state.

In an important paper in 1993, scientists at Yale University compiled an
extensive list of mind/body research, including the harmful effects of
stress on diabetes, heart disease, metastasis of cancer, asthma attacks, and
bowel disease. Stress even adversely affected the nervous system itself,
causing damage to the hippocampus and hence to our memory.

Other studies done recently strengthen the link between stress and

other diseases:

* flare-ups in herpes due to stress

* incidence of colon cancer and stress

* incidence of heart disease and hopelessness

* surviving bypass heart surgery and optimism

* surviving second heart attacks and anger

* heart attack rate and depression

* survival rates from breast cancer and participation in support groups

The list of experimental and epidemiological results is quite extensive

_and has survived peer review in established medical journals.

One of the tasks of twenty-first-century medical science will be to flesh
out precisely how this mind/body link operates at the molecular level. On

the one hand, there is the well-established relationship between our emotions
and our endocrine system. When faced with a life-threatening

emergency, our brain sends electrical signals to our glands to emit 
adrenaline, noradrenaline, and cortisol, which then circulate in our blood and
prepare the body for the “flight or fight” response. The brain also signals
the glands to produce natural opiates like beta-endorphin and enkephalin
to prepare for possible pain. The flooding of our body with these power 
hormones suppresses our immune system (perhaps an ancient evolutionary 
response to conserve our resources in an emergency).

In 1996, scientists at the National Institute of Mental Health did a
careful study of the effect of depression in women (the average age of the
women was forty-one). They found the sad women suffered from
 14 percent lower bone density. They also found that these women
had higher levels of the hormone cortisol, which can cause bone loss. In a
hird of the women studied, the loss of bone was so severe that it matched
he level of bone loss usually seen after menopause. One theory is that