 But if a cell contains a time bomb, then what is the fuse? We now know.

In the 1970s, it was noticed that the ends of our chromosomes have 4
“cap” on them called telomeres, much like the plastic tips on the ends of
shoelaces that prevent them from getting frayed. If these telomeres are
lost, then the chromosomes stick to each other and the cell eventually
dies. In a normal cell, the telomere fuse gradually becomes shorter and
shorter, until the cell commits suicide. When the fuse is gone, that is the
end of the cell. But certain abnormal cells, we now understand, have the
remarkable ability to keep the telomere fuse perpetually long. They be
come immortal. Such cells are called cancer cells.

Close examination of the telomeres showed they consisted of the ge:
netic sequence: TTAGGG . . . repeated over and over again, up to
2,000 times. It was found that the older the cell, the shorter the telomere,
The cell loses about 10 to 20 of these segments every time it divides—the
fuse gets shorter after each division. It was theorized, therefore, that
when the fuse (telomere) gets too short after too many cell divisions, the
telomere disappears and the cell dies.

In 1984, the enzyme “telomerase” was discovered; this enzyme could
reverse the process and lengthen the telomeres, thereby preventing cell
suicide. Telomerase, however, is absent in’ most cells of the body.

In 1994, Christopher M. Counter, Silvia Bacchetti, and their colleagues
at McMaster University made a crucial discovery. They showed that
telomerase is found in a wide variety of cancers, which have a genetic
mutation allowing them to manufacture telomerase. This, in turn, prevented 
their telomeres from disappearing and thereby made them immortal.

With these discoveries, we now have a working hypothesis about cell
aging, cell death, and cancers. The telomere acts like a clock which 
measures the process of cell aging and death. The shorter the telomere, the
older the cell. Cancer cells, because they can manufacture telomerase,
which freezes the contraction of the telomeres, “have forgotten how to
die,” as Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute, puts it.

This discovery opens up new avenues for cancer detection and therapies in 
the twenty-first century. One method would be to detect telomer
ase in the body. S normal cells lack telomerase, the presence of this
enzyme would signal the presence oF rowing cance celle kook
normally. Since telomerase is not found in normal cells, this therapy

would target only cancer cells. (Chemotherapy, by contrast, acts more
like a blunderbuss, striking normal and cancer cells alike.)

Cancer is a crazy quilt of at least 200 different kinds of diseases, 
one for every kind of human tissue, will not be cured in its entirety
2020. As Richard Klausner of the National Cancer Institute says:
here will never be a single cure for cancer.”

However, by 2020 scientists should have an almost complete catalog of
he mutations involved in these 200 cancers, which will trigger an explosive
growth in radically new cancer therapies and detections, including a
variety of startling new strategies for attacking cancer’s molecular weak
pots and vulnerabilities.

There are several new avenues generating intense interest, many of
yhich should reach fruition by 2020.

The first has to do with cancer detection. Imagine being able to detect a
iny colony of cancer cells a decade before a visible tumor forms. Exremely 
sensitive tests are now being devised (and will soon hit the maret) which 
can detect infinitesimal amounts of proteins that are emitted
by only a few hundred cancer cells as they grow and eventually create
lood vessels. These proteins can be detected by analyzing one’s urine
nd blood. Similarly, doctors will be able to test directly for the presence
if cancer genes in our genetic makeup. About half of all cancers are found
I our hollow organs (lung, colon, bladder), which often have a mutant
gene. By devising simple tests in our urine and blood for the ras gene
which in the future will be performed in our own home), we will be able

The second approach has to do with the development of natural cancer
fighters. Science is beginning to understand at the molecular level why
certain natural products and vitamins help guard against cancer. Genisein, 
which is found in soybeans and cabbage, is found in high concentrations in 
the Japanese diet and is known to suppress the formation of blood
vessels in cancer tumors. (The Japanese, in fact, have concentrations of
renistein in their urine 30 times that of Westerners.) Antioxidants in
foods (like vitamin C and E, and lycopene in tomatoes, catechins in berries, 
and carotenoids in carrots) are known to reduce the mutation rate in
cells by suppressing free radicals. Other vegetables contain chemicals that
create enzymes which protect against cancer (such as indoles in cabbage,
imonoids in citrus fruits, isothlocyanates in mustard).

The third approach is enhancing the immune system. Normally, the antibodies 
created by the immune system are not sufficiently powerful to
target a cancer cell. One can, however, create “monoclonal antibodies,”