Biological and physical laws of nature are not
necessarily inherent in the laws of logic.

Douglas Lenat has devoted a lifetime to conquering the mysteries of
common sense. He feels that the problem is that artificial intelligence (AT)
researchers have tiptoed around the periphery of the real problem. What
is needed, he says, is nothing less than an “AI Manhattan Project,” a full
frontal assault on common sense. The challenge is to create an Encyclopedia 
of Common Sense—i.e., a nearly complete set of common-sense
rules. In other words, instead of analyzing isolated pieces of logic, he is
advocating a brute force, take-no-prisoners approach.

Beginning in 1984, Lenat began to create Cyc (short for encyclopedia),
a $25 million project which was funded by a consortium of companies
including Xerox, Digital Equipment, Kodak, and Apple. While previous
programs could barely achieve the common-sense logic of a three-year old, 
Cyc’s goal was to achieve the common-sense knowledge of an adult.
“No one in 2015 would dream of buying a machine without common
sense,” Lenat claims, “any more than anyone today would buy a personal
computer that couldn’t run spreadsheets [or] word processing programs.”

Lenat believes that in the future everyone will load common-sense
programs into their computers, allowing them to have intelligent 
conversations with their computers, which will be capable of interpreting and
carrying out people’s commands. Lenat’s goal is to write down a complete list 
of all common-sense rules. Some “obvious” rules include:

¢ Nothing can be in two places at the same time.
¢ When humans die, they are not born again.

* Dying is undesirable.

¢ Animals do not like pain.

¢ Time advances at the same rate for everyone.

* When it rains, people get wet.

* Sweet things taste good.

Each “obvious” statement can take his crew many weeks or months to
break down into its logical components. After ten years of work, he has
accumulated 10 million such assertions, requiring a billion bytes 
of information. He ultimately hopes to accumulate a staggering 100 
million “obvious”’ assertions.

At times Lenat despairs of compiling all the ambiguities hidden within
the English, language, ambiguities that are only resolved by a person’s
knowledge of the real world. Take, for example, the statement: “Mary saw
a bicycle in the store window. She wanted it.” Lenat says, “How do we
know that she wanted the bicycle, and not the store, or the window?”
The actual resolution of this simple problem requires that Cyc understand 
the nearly complete set of likes and dislikes of human beings.

The difficulty of the problem is underscored by the fact that it took
Lenat three months for him to program Cyc to understand the following:

“Napoleon died on St. Helena. Wellington was saddened.” Unraveling
these two deceptively simple sentences was complicated because Cyc had
to untangle a chain of “obvious” statements. First, Cyc had to figure out
that Napoleon was a person; that persons have the unfortunate habit of
dying; that death is irreversible and undesirable; that death, in turn, often
triggers emotion; and that sadness is one of these emotions.

Lenat and his staff get ideas for Cyc from a most unusual source: by
reading scandalous supermarket tabloids and asking themselves what Cyc
needs to know to understand (or refute) them. Lenat asks the question:
can Cyc spot the errors in the tabloids? (If Cyc succeeds in seeing
through the misconceptions in the supermarket tabloids, it probably will
have already exceeded the common-sense abilities of a great many Americans!)

One of Lenat’s intermediate goals is to hit the “break even” point,
where the computer will be able to learn faster by simply “reading” new
material than by having an army of private tutors with Ph.D.s. Like a
young bird taking off on its maiden voyage, Cyc will then be able to soar
on its own power. At that point, it can dispense with human teachers and,
like a ten-year-old child, read and learn on its own.

Lenat sums up his philosophy with the statement: “Intelligence is 10
million rules.” This is the opposite of the approach taken in physics,
where physicists try to reduce vast amounts of material to the simplest
equations. According to Lenat, this is, in fact, the problem with AI 
research. Like AI founder Marvin Minsky, Lenat believes that AI researchers 
have fallen victim to “physics envy.” Impressed with how successful
physicists have been in representing the physical world with a handful of
equations, they have mistakenly thought that artificial intelligence could
also be reduced to a few lines of logic.

But to Lenat, common sense and intelligence are the sum total of
millions of lines of code. They cannot be reduced to a few lines of logic.
This is why Lenat feels the Cyc program is so important. Beyond 2020, if
Cyc can be successfully incorporated into an expert system, it could give
us computerized doctors, industrial chemists and engineers, lawyers, and
sO on.

Not everyone in the AI community believes in Lenat’s work. Maes, for
example, thinks that a truly intelligent agent must learn from and interact