

and report natural objects and phenomena, so faith
another stay at home and report the phenomena of life!)

It must be remembered, however, that Walden is not
autobiography but a literary work in which Thoreau
liberties for the sake of the artistic integrity of the my)
he is creating. Differentiating between his actual and hi:
life, Thoreau wrote to Harrison Gray Otis Blake on 27}
1848: “My actual life is a fact in view of which I have no
sion to congratulate myself, but for my faith and aspirations
have respect. It is from these that I speak.” Similarly, he
to Calvin Greene on 10 February 1856: “You may rely
that you have the best of me in my books, and that I am
worth seeing personally—the stuttering, blundering, :
hopper that I am. Even poetry, you know, is in one se
infinite brag & exaggeration. Not that I do not stand
that I have written —but what am to the truth I feebly

Thoreau wrote about half of what became Walden y
he was living at Walden Pond. Working his way through,
wishing and rewriting the manuscript later, on 9 Novem
1851, he wrote in his journal: “I, too, would fain set
something beside facts. Facts should only be as the fr:
my pictures; they should be material to the mythology I
lam writing... . My facts should be falsehoods to common 
sense. I would so state facts that they shall be signifi
shall be myths or mythologic.” iil

Mythology was clearly what Thoreau was writing, [
reads Walden in any way other than the way it was in
to be read, the reader is predisposed to failure. “To read
what is, to read true books in a true spirit, is a noble exercise, 
and one that will task the reader more than any exercise which the 
customs of the day esteem,” Thoreau wrote in “Reading,” “It requires 
a training such as the athletes underwent, the steady intention almost 
of the whole life to this object. Books must be read as deliberately 
and reservedly as they were written.” If one thinks of Walden as 
the record of one man’s stay at Walden Pond, reading it as autobiography,
it becomes easy to join the host of those who cavil at Thoreau, 
focusing on the dinners he ate with the Emersons or the
laundry his mother and sisters did for him.

Thoreau is clear in his intentions and in the instructions
he presents in “Reading”: “The heroic books, even if printed
in the character of our mother tongue, will always be in a
language dead to degenerate times; and we must laboriously —
seek the meaning of each word and line, conjecturing a larger
sense than common use permits out of what wisdom and
valor and generosity we have.” Thoreau is not writing about
books from a distant past, the classics of spiritual literature,
both Eastern and Western. He is writing about the book
you're holding in your hand. Walden is a heroic book because
it is a book about a hero. ©

In “Thomas Carlyle and His Works,” Thoreau wrote
about both Carlyle’s On Heroes, Hero- Worship, and the Heroic
in History and Emerson's Representative Men that neither
represents “the Man of the Age, come to be called workingman.” 
He continued, “It is obvious that none yet speaks to
his condition, for the speaker is not yet in his condition.” He
understood, as he would write in “Walking,” that “the hero is

