
This was a sharing in God’s divine act of creation,
speaking words that bring things to be. This is one of the most morally
responsible acts of any human being. As Emily Dickinson said:

Could mortal lip divine
The undeveloped freight
Of a delivered syllable
’Twould crumble at the weight."

Let us begin with the words that we do not speak, the silences that hurt
the Church. Why do we say so little to each other? This silence has
marked our words from the beginning. When God comes looking for
Adam and Eve after their sin, they hide because they do not wish to talk,
We have seen the silence of the women at the tomb. The silence within
the Church was, it has been argued, intensified after the Thirty Years War
in the seventeenth century. 

It is almost impossible for us to imagine the sheer brutal horror of that
war, in which Christians turned on each other with an unprecedented
bloodthirstiness. One bitter fruit of that rending of the Body of Christ
was a deeper silence. There were things that could no longer be discussed,
 either between Christian Churches or within the Churches,
There was a new dogmatism. There was less discussion than in the
medieval Church, in which one could argue for virtually any crazy
proposition. Stephen Toulmin, of the University of South Carolina,
argues that from then on backsliders met with no mercy. Theological 
commitments were not less rigorous and demanding but more. There was less
chance for critical discussion of doctrine, not more. For the first time,
the need to close ranks and defend Catholicism against Protestant
heretics was an occasion for elevating key doctrines out of the reach of reappraisal, even by the most sympathetic and convinced believers. 

The distinction between ‘doctrines’ and ‘dogmas’ was invented by the
Council of Trent. Counter-Reformation Catholicism was thus dogmatic 
in a way that the pre-Reformation Christianity of, say, an
Aquinas could never have been.’



So the great wounding of Christendo, in the seventeenth century 
introduced a weakening of debate within the Church. We had to toe the party
line, to stick to precise formulations of dogmatic positions in the face of
the enemy. Anyone who raised questions or entertained doubts was
subverting the common cause. They were fifth columnists, on the side of
the enemy, crypto-Protestants. And Toulmin shows that there was just
the same sort of dogmatism to be found in the Protestant Churches
as well. It was not especially Catholic. It was just the beginning of
modernity. So there is a certain beauty that, in seeking to understand how
to find a way forward beyond divisions within the Roman Catholic
Church, I have twice appealed to the words of the Archbishop of Canterbury, 
the head of a Church separated from ours at that very painful time.

We still have not left behind that silence. In Called to be Catholic, the
founding declaration of The Catholic Common Ground Project, we are
warned that ‘across the whole spectrum of views within the church, 
proposals are subject to ideological litmus tests. Ideas, journals, and leaders
are pressed to align themselves with pre-existing camps, and are viewed
warily when they depart from those expectations.” The destruction of
the common home of Christianity in Europe brought us centuries ago
into a sort of politics of identity, which is why one must not project too
cosy an image of the pre-Vatican Church, and this has intensified. One
must say the right thing to belong. ‘Is she sound?” Communion Catholics
may ask. ‘Is he open?’ Kingdom Catholics ask in turn. ‘Is he one of us? I
am reminded of a text from Augustine: ‘The clouds of heaven thunder
forth throughout the world that God’s house is being built. But these
frogs sit in their pond and croak: “We’re the only Christians.”

The Second Vatican Council attempted to break this silence. John
XXIII wished it to be a pastoral Council and not a dogmatic Council. He
commented that one proposed document had seventeen centimetres of
condemnations. He himself is only known to have made one infallible
declaration. When he visited the Master’s terrace in S. Sabina, 
the headquarters of the Dominican Order, he is reported to have said, “This is the
best view in Rome, and that is infallible!’ But the Council left lots of
things unsaid, or at least unresolved. Maybe that was necessary and
unavoidable if the Council were ever to end. But we have since been
haunted by what the Council did not say.

3 From ‘Catholic Common Ground’ website.
4 Enarratio in Psalmum XCV, Augustini opera omnia, Vol. IV, Migne, p. 1234.