

nv intense sense of oneself, and yet it also makes one disappear from the
picture. Chastity is in retaining the dynamic balance. If egoism takes over
ihen one tips into lust, and if infatuation then self-denial may become so
absolute that one loses all identity. The film Les Liaisons Dangereuses
shows two French aristocrats competing to manipulate people into
sexual relationships. The turning point is when Le Vicomte Sébastien de
Valmont has become so infatuated that he loses his ability to control
himself and the other person. ‘As for this present infatuation, it won't
last, but, for the present it is beyond my control’ Domination is transformed 
into powerlessness, and lust into infatuation without pausing at
that fine point of equilibrium at which love might germinate.
I So Christian ethics should help us to live our sexuality in the light of
the Eucharist. Here I am, and I give myself to you, without reservation,
now and for ever}Our teaching is not about saying what one is allowed
or not allowed to do. Often people hope that the Church may relax the
rules, as many hoped that the government would change the opening
hours so that pubs could stay open longer. But ethics is not about what
is permitted or forbidden, but seeks to articulate the meaning of what we
do. The Christian claim is that to give one’s body to another person is an
act with an intrinsic meaning and that if we sleep around promiscuously
we are contradicting the meaning embedded in our bodies, which is
bound to lead to frustration and unhappiness. We talk of “body language’, but 
all bodily activity speaks. Herbert McCabe asserted that
‘ethics is just the study of human behaviour in so far as it is a piece of
communication, in so far as it says something or fails to say something
_.. Ethics is thus the quest for less and’ less and trivial modes of human
relatedness;*° So casual sex is the subversion of communication. We say
something with our bodies which we deny with our lives. It is like saying
to someone ‘I love you, and then forgetting ami that they exist.
In our society people think about sex in all sorts of ways, from expressing 
a tender care for someone to having a bit of fun. Few people give it
the deep meaning that it has in the Christian tradition. How can Christians
 persevere in that eucharistic understanding of sexuality when every I
day, in conversation, reading the papers and watching the television, weI
are told that it means something different? It is like trying to hang on to
the conviction that the world is round when everyone around one is
working on the assumption that it is flat. And there are all sorts of
 sociological facts which make it much harder for us than for our ancestors to

