It was the nonsense of this bloodthirsty struggle _
of the indigenous people and the brethren agreed that in his sermon that
Sunday, Antonio Montesinos should confront the Spanish conquer
with their sin. He claimed to be speaking with the voice of Christ:

This voice says that you are all in mortal sin and that you will live an
die in it for the cruelty and tyranny with which you use these innocent
people. Tell me, with what right, with what justice do you hold .
Indians in such cruel and horrible slavery? With what authority have
you waged such detestable wars against these people who were 
in their lands so mildly and peacefully, where you have consumed sud
huge numbers of them, with unheard of death and destruction? 

Are you not human? Do they not have rational souls? Are you not able to
love them as yourselves? Don’t you understand this? Can’t you grasp
He is astonished that the Spanish conquerors have not grasped what the
are doing to these native people. But maybe these friars had only under 
stood what was happening precisely because of this failure of imma y
on the part of the Spanish. It triggered a breakthrough into a new andi
standing of human beings as the bearers of inalienable rights, regardless
of whether they were Christian or not. It was because of the ccandl i
of the failure of the Spanish settlers to grasp the rights of the Indi a
that the friars did so for the first time, just as we are never aware of val
interior organ in our body until it starts to hurt. a
Similarly the vast carnage of the two world wars led to the foundati
of the United Nations and Universal Declaration of Human Rights i”

sense of what it was for us to be members of the human community, _

became instantly symbolic of our vulnerability to unknown

danger. It focused a sense of diffuse insecurity. The devastation stretched

from Indonesia to the east coast of Africa, linking distant people in a

shared disaster. It afflicted people living in tropical paradises, places

which we Westerners dream of visiting, but in this case a paradise
destroyed. People from all over the globe died. It provoked a massive
ylobal response. It was feared by some charities that this generosity
would mean that less money was given to other causes, and so that aid

\o Africa, for example, would suffer. This has not proved to be the case.

Most charities have found that the tsunami occasioned an increase of

yenerosity to other causes. It made us more deeply aware of how we are

interconnected.

The process of globalization that began when our ancestors first left
Africa has reached a new level. We live in a world of instant communication. I can chat with people on the other side of the globe with ease.
‘his morning I received e-mails from a Muslim friend in Cairo and a
Dominican nun in Zimbabwe. Fukuyama talked about the end of
history, and Richard O’Brien has added, ‘the end of geography.’ This is
wonderful and a daily source of delight for me. It may almost look like
an anticipation of our eschatological hopes. When_Jesus_meets the
Samaritan woman, he promises a time when God will be worshipped
neither on the mountain of the Samaritans nor in Jerusalem, “but in_
spirit and in truth’ Christianity liberates us from a religion of holy spaces _
into the life of the Trinity, ‘God, that centre Who is everywhere, and_
whose circumference is nowhere’ Cyberspace can look a little like the
“Tulfilment of the Christian promise.

“To discover how it is not, we have to be aware of the underbelly of our
society. We are also bound together by the drug trade, whose profits
exceed those of the oil trade and by networks of criminality which may
well come to rule our world. According to Manuel Castells, ‘the question
is not whether our societies will be able to eliminate the criminal networks, but, rather, whether criminal networks will not end up by controlling a substantial share of our economy, of our institutions, and of
our everyday life.’ The criminals may well be winning in Russia.

7 Global Financial Integration: The End of Geography, London 1992, quoted in
7 Bauman, Globalization: the Human Consequences, London 1998, p. 12.

8 Chapter 7, note 2.

9 End of the Millenium, Oxford 1998, p. 354.