

The apple trees—this is mid-August—are quietly, awkwardly
spectacular: graduated in abutting fields from the fully human —
and operational to fledglings of 3 or 4 different sizes.

Late afternoon landscape with grassy dome, farm pond (with 2 7
large outcroppings near the center), cylindrical bales of hay, oaks _
and willows, maples, Constable shagginess and highlightings, —
and the dead en route: deer, raccoons, chipmunks, skunks, a I
venturesome chicken, an occasional bird—like the one that hit
the windshield and popped up and back onto the road only
without a pop. For a second it seemed as though nothing had
happened and the bird was simply flying off in another direction,
as surreal, or unreal, as the local speed limits.

—A Constable, with a Hopper parked in the middle of it.



Dawn, or a monarch butterfly. Cow mooing its tail off, followed
by a rooster and various birds, all in D major. Artificially cool,
the sky draped rather loosely but pinned down wherever the
potential for disturbance exists (prickly ridge, electric wires, a

150-year-old giant oak gnarled and distorted, etc.). Buzzing and
rattling, not yet burning.

The new lilac has an aura already, despite or possibly because
of its being dwarfed by so much cedar in front behind in back
above below [desire mine]. The cedars, to give them their due,
ire perfectible: the problem is that the air is already perfect and
taking up almost all the space.

It’s interesting how every hum could be a plane, an approaching
storm, a truck, a hornet, a sign of roadwork, but not the sea.
The seas have dried up and embed splinters that were once
demisemiquavers.

Is far more pinkish violet than the sky’s yet
you exceed the shadows on the railing caused by nieces
breeze through the chewed up—thanks to the deer—juniper.
The red has vanished close to the top and your scattering casera
the changeable filaments amounts to an infusion which, if its
episodes were piled, would reach all the way to the telephone
wires, fleeting and on record for its fleetingness.

Shadows being a literal commentary on things—
I Underneath the sky is a single snow-dark cloud with no visible
means of support fortunately it doesn’t have to hold anything up self o self
unfortunately the deer left in a rush taking Scotch bottles of Queen
Anne’s Lace with them