

I have to confess that Bon appétit never strikes me as an appropriate
invitation. It seems too.. -medicinal, like charging a poem with
the obligation to improve, or at least define, one’s sense of self,
Speaking of which, how many of our great poets are themselves
more than 8% of the time? Not Just the obvious cases. Take I
Yeats. Or take Hart Crane. Take almost anyone. I don’t feel
as confident saying so, but I’m pretty sure the same is true for
painters even if the percentages go up some. So much of what
we experience as present is earmarked for the future. Sing,
Contingency, of a single membrane in the process of becoming _
a frame house open to the charcoal and cantaloupe of evening—
of the unfavored nation status of line. I like the idea that the air
is too close to either prove or disprove its existence, and that it
has no stake whatever in the issue. The deer are practically pets.
A few days ago, the small one that lay down to die got up when
no one was looking. No one ever sees a live skunk, yet we take
the facts of its life on the evidence. Along with a certain amount
of shivering and pure, or at least uncharacterizable, qualia. The
impressions planted before the realms collide. Still, the houses
linear or not, retain a humanity despite their continuity with
anything and everything, power and phone lines as much as
faraway loosestrife whose color (whatever else it may take cover
under) floods the eye. The pond calmed down earlier. Written
on in only a few spots apart from the questionable egrets—living
question marks is what I mean. I don’t, personally, see much
suffering other than the everpresent kind. I can envision the
Incredible Shrinking Man, by now not so incredible, up to his
neck in ground cover or the dried up stalks showing above the
pond surface, barely taking in the postings against deer-hunting,
the freeze-frames of the hawks, the occasional ghostly flock of
wild turkeys among the ubiquitous cedars—plus hints of yet-tobe-
instantiated structure. The lintels, what there is of them, are
heartbreaking.