God asks Israel ‘not to hide ‘yourself from your own ‘flesh
(Isaiah 58.7). We may seek to preserve our fragile happiness by protect:
ing ourselves from the pain that surrounds us. It may threaten to over:
whelm us. Sometimes I find myself hardly daring even to see the eyes of
people who beg in the street, and they are my flesh.

One year I drove from one side of Nigeria to the other. We sometimes
went through areas where thousands of people are suffering from
leprosy. They live in lepers’ colonies, but receive no food in them. So they
build small huts of palm leaves and camp by the sides of the road. They
wear strange straw hats which are signs of their identity as lepers. One
passes through crowds of them for hours. Because of the potholes in the
road, cars can only drive very slowly and so the crowds press against the
windows begging for something, showing you their wounds. The worst
_ thing is to see the eyes of the children, filled with hope and pain. Their
whole lives will be spent by the roadside, begging. They have no other
future, Does one dare to look into their eyes? Does one dare to let oneself
be touched by their hope. and th their pain? ‘T found myself having to resist
asking the driver to drive more quickly, because of the intolerable sorrow
of their eyes. But any happiness which is built on being insensitive, in the
retreat from compassion, is ultimately unsustainable because it is a
refusal of the happiness of those who are indeed part of my own being,

It would be like a determined attempt to be jolly when one is suffering
from toothache.

The opposite of joy is not sorrow but the numbness of heart that
makes us incapable of any y feeling. “Suffering can give us stony hearts
Simone Weil describes how labouring i in a factory kills the soul: ‘Upon
taking up your post at your machine, you must kill your soul for eight
hours a day, kill your thoughts, feelings, everything .. . You must sup:
press, purge yourself of all your irritation, sadness or disgust: they would
% lessen the pace. You must even abolish joy.*! But orrow can also somes
times hollow us out so that we are capable of a deeper j joy. It can break

our hearts of stone and give us hearts of flesh. When you wish to make
meat tender, then sometimes you must hammer out the knots in it. This
is what God seems to do to our hearts.

The most joyful saints are therefore also the most sorrowful. St
Dominic laughed in the day with his brethren, but he wept at night with
God. St Francis of Assisi was a man of exuberant joy, but he also bore the
sliymata. In Fioretti, the link is clearly made. When he beholds the
seraph on Mount La Verna, ‘he was filled with sweetness and sorrow
mingled with wonder. Joy he had exceeding great ... but he suffered
unspeakable grief and compassion.” If we would share God’s joy then
we must share his sorrow at the suffering of the world. If one insulates
oneself against the pain of the world, then one can never be deeply
joyful. William Blake wrote:

Man was made for Joys and Woe
And when this we rightly know
Thro the World we safely go

Joy and Woe are woven fine

A clothing for the Soul divine
Under every grief and pine

Runs a joy with silken twine.”

Often in Africa I saw how suffering demolishes superficial optimism I
and uncovers a profound and exultant joyfulness. One must either hope
strongly or despair. I was in Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, when the rebels had surrounded the city and it looked as if it
Might fall at any moment. An interview with one of the brethren was
interrupted when there was an explosion directly over the Priory and we
both ended up under the table. Everyone was tense, awaiting the violence
io come. Then we went to the church to celebrate the Eucharist, which
was filled with a joy that I cannot describe. Even in the sacristy before the
procession began, the dancing was infectious!

Death

And Jesus uttered a loud cry, and breathed his last. And the curtain of
the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom. And when the centurion, 
who stood facing him, saw that he thus breathed his last, he
said, “Truly this man was the Son of God? (Mark 15.37-39)
