
state of tension. In studying its actions and its results, we shall have to say,
each time, whether it remains faithful to its first noble promises or if,
through indolence or folly, it forgets its original purpose and plunges into
a mire of tyranny or servitude. !

Viewed in this way, rebellion ultimately brings us not to excess, 
as in the Outlaw syndrome, but rather to the restraint and
Moderation that affirm our continual struggle as humans. Camus puts it
this way:

Whatever we may do, excess will always keep its place in the heart of man,
iii the place where solitude is found. We all carry within us our places of
exile, our crimes and our ravages. But our task is not to unleash them on
ihe world; it is to fight them in ourselves and in others.4

In rebelling through addiction, many addicts plunge into the very
tyranny and servitude they sought to escape. They become self-justified
in their rebellion, alienated from their fellow humans, and lost in their
own indulgences. Thus they embody the very thing they are protesting—
the carelessness of a society that fails to honor the unique creative
being of individuals and aggrandizes nature for its own uses.

Camus contrasts rebellion with resentment (a chief attribute of the
addict) in order to distinguish between the passive-negative mode of
resentment, which closes upon itself in “‘autointoxication,” and the
liberating active energy of rebellion. He points out that resentment is
like an evil secretion of prolonged impotence in a sealed vessel. In
contrast, rebellion “breaks the seal and allows the whole being to come
into play. It liberates stagnant waters and turns them into a ragi
torrent.”’? The resentful person takes delight when someone he envies
suffers humiliation and pain. But at bottom the resentment is really
resentment at himself. The resentful person wants to be other than he
is. This resentment often turns into unscrupulous ambition if he is strong
or bitterness if he is weak. In contrast, the Rebel defends who he is and
does not allow others to violate him. Rebellion is always a passionate
affirmation of the integrity of the human being.

Camus reminds us of the original meaning of the spirit in rebellion
that sharing of strangeness and solitude from which human solidarity i
born. This paradoxical acknowledgment of the strangeness that unites
people can be seen in the communal sharing of recovering addicts—in
meeting and sharing their suffering with humility, a kind of miracle
happens. The humiliated estranged “I” of the suffering addict becomes
the “‘We”’ of recovering addicts transforming themselves and others.
Camus says: “I rebel—therefore we exist.”

According to Camus, rebellion is a principle of human existence.
‘Taken to its utmost limits, it implies a positive value to society and a
hope for the creation of new ways to realize this value, as opposed to
conformity to rigid, destructive social structures. Rebellion implies the
acceptance of suffering within our human limits and, ultimately, the
decision to endure. This decision does not come from obedience to outer
religious or political dictates but from a stark intelligent confrontation

fivercoming the Outlaw’s contamination by resentment, which “denies
life,’ “dashes toward destruction,” and ends in “rancor, malice and
tyiinny,” finally becoming the “murderer,” the Rebel lives life on this
path, enduring the tensions of time in order to give meaning to the
moment.

lit he who dedicates himself to the duration of his life, to the house he
builds, to the dignity of mankind, dedicates himself to the earth and reaps
from it the harvest that sows its seed and sustains the world again and
again. Finally, it is those who know how to rebel, at the appropriate
moment, against history who really advance its interests. To rebel against
supposes an interminable tension and the agonized serenity of which
 Char also speaks. But the true life is present in the heart of this
dichotomy. Life is this dichotomy itself, the mind soaring over volcanoes
light, the madness of justice, the extenuating intransigence of moderation, 
‘The words that reverberate for us at the confines of this long
adventure of rebellion are not formulas for optimism, for which we have
If possible use in the extremities of our unhappiness, but words of courage
wild intelligence which, on the shores of the eternal seas, even have the
qualities of virtue.>

‘The transformation of the Outlaw into the Rebel is an act of courage
In a  dignity that takes us beyond nihilism. The Rebel overcomes the
obsessions of the outlaw and “‘indefatigably confronts evil.’ The Rebel
outlnes not abandon society and live in resentment, inflation, and rancor
in or above the law, as does the Outlaw. Instead, the Rebel returns
life and generously gives with a “strange form of love” to the present,
refusing injustice and hoping to bring dignity to the humiliated.’ Thus,
through rebellion, the alienated Outlaw can reaffirm the love within
himself that was striving for uniqueness and creativity but was lost
through excess and through escaping the creative conflict by living at
wily one pole of his being. The Outlaw can transform his hatred of
sueiety into love and generosity which makes: