 THE CREATION
 to fear him: he rakes the money towards him in great piles and 
home each evening with at least one thousand gilders. In short, I shall d
my utmost to gamble as carefully as possible. On the other hand I know
not the strength to remain here very long. To be frank, Anna, all this
repellent. It is so foul that I would prefer to run away from myself, !
when I think of you, Iam drawn to you with the whole of my being. O!
dear Anna, I know in advance how sorely I need you.”

Dostoevsky knew his passion for gambling was destructive and ultimately
demonic, eating at him in much the same way that his love for
had devoured his soul. But he was caught in the whirlwind, in
dizzying atmosphere of gambling that he had described in The Game
in the intoxication of challenge. Yet, it was this urge to live intensely
the edge of The Abyss and to push beyond all limits that also 
to surpass himself creatively. The very struggle with fate at the end
the precipice that he experienced at the roulette table was the §,
force that fed his creativity. In a letter, describing his obsession
gambling, he had once written disparagingly about himself: ‘And
worst part of it is that I have a vile and overly passionate nature
Everywhere and in everything I drive myself to the ultimate limit, all I
life I have been overstepping the line.’ In his novels, too, his characters
try to cross the frontiers and struggle to transgress the limits, just
Dostoevsky continually crossed and created new frontiers with his wi
ing. A gambler and a love addict, he knew intimately the power of I
Demon Lover and portrayed that figure brilliantly in his work. He 4
knew how to struggle with that energy and transform it creatively throu
his writing. He knew the greater power of the Creative Daimon. Inst
of adding to the destructive and nihilistic forces in the cosmos, Dostor
sky wanted to give humankind a gift, and consciously he suffered a
sacrificed himself to do this. Eventually, through his writings, he fir
himself from most of his addictions.*! I
From the gambling center of Saxon-les-Bains, in November, 186
Dostoevsky wrote his wife that he had hit bottom and would ne\
gamble again. Work on the novel, he knew, was the only thing that cou
save him.

Anya, my beloved, I have gambled everything away, everything! Oh, dear
angel, don’t be sad, don’t be apprehensive! Rest assured that the day will
soon come when I shall at last be worthy of you, when I shall no longer
to you like a coarse, filthy thief! (ow the novel, the novel alone must
save us. Oh, if only you knew what hopes I have of it! Be sure that shall
reach my goal and earn your respect. I shall never gamble again, never,
Exactly the same thing happened two years ago in Wiesbaden. The
situation was desperate then, too, but my work saved me. I shall now take
up my work with hope and love—and in two years’ time you shall see!*?

Although this was not yet to be the end of Dostoevsky’s gambling, it was
the beginning of a novel about a new inner figure—a compassionate man
with a pure and beautiful heart, “‘a wholly beautiful individual.”

When Dostoevsky returned to Geneva, he wrote one hundred pages
in three weeks time about a character who promised redemption from
lily own tragically addictive passions. Dostoevsky had been wrestling
with many ideas about the hero for a new novel. His notebooks show
sketches of a protagonist who is full of pride, one who is bored and
becomes self-destructive. But the image of the “holy fool’ won out.
Awain, Dostoevsky had taken an advance for the novel and had promised
the first installment for January 1868. Writing The Idiot was for him like
the risk he took at roulette. Dostoevsky himself makes this analogy:

‘Then (since my entire future depended on it) I set about the painful task
of inventing a mew novel... . For a long time already, there was one idea
that had been troubling me, but I was afraid to make a novel out of it
because it was a very difficult idea, and I was not ready to tackle it,
although it is a fascinating idea and one I am in love with. That idea is—
to portray a perfectly good man. \ believe there can be nothing more difficult
than this, especially in our time. I am sure you will agree entirely with
this. The idea used to flash through my head in a somewhat artistic form,
but only somewhat, not in the full-blown form that was needed. It was only
the desperate situation in which I found myself that made me embark
upon an idea that had not yet reached full maturity. I took a chance, like
at roulette. “Maybe it will develop as I write it!” That is a quite 
unforgivable thing to do. On the whole, a plan has taken shape. As I go along,
various details crop up that I find fascinating and stimulating. But the
whole? But the hero? Somehow the whole thing seems to turn on the
figure of she hero. That is the way it has evolved. I must establish the
character of the hero. Will it develop under my pen?

‘Thus, the “beautiful individual” was born out of his desperate financial
situation, and he risked letting this premature figure develop on the
printed page. His character, Prince Myshkin, was an enigma who gradually 
created himself. It was not until the end of the novel that the author
was at all clear about him. Just as the parents of a new baby do not know
beforehand the person they bring forth, so it was in writing for Dostoevsky.
 All creation is a risk! The difference between the risk of an addiction
and the risk of the creative process is that the former leads in the end
only to slavery and self-destruction, while the latter opens up new worlds.