In primordial times the world order was inverted, and it was 
men who menstruated and jaguars who owned fire and hunted with 
bows and arrows. The myths recount how these first relationships 
were overturned and the current order established. For society to 
endure, the rules of social behaviour and ritual observance as 
laid down by the mythic ancestors must be adhered to if
disorder and ultimately disaster are to be avoided.

The ceremonial houses of tropical forest peoples are deeply symbolic in
design: many were conceived as microcosms of the tribes’ cosmic and
social universes. For example, the roundhouses of the Venezuelan
Yekuana are designed as imitations of the primordial structure built by an
incarnation of the sun god Wanadi. Architectural details reflect features of
the celestial sphere and mythical geography. Thus, the central house-post
(topped by a.sculpture of a crimson-crested woodpecker, the animal form
of W adi’s incarnation) symbolically links the netherworld of lost souls
with the middle earth of men and the vault of the heavens; the two 
crossbeams are orientated north-south to mirror the appearance of the Milky
Way in the night sky; and the main entrance faces east, permitting the
rising equinoctial sun to shine onto the central post.


For some Amerindian tribes, head-hunting was an activity charged with supernatural
and ritual significance. Among the Jivaro of Ecuador, where head-hunting persisted
until the 1960s, the privilege of taking human heads was restricted to a coterie of
feared warriors who had established reputations as killers. In Jivaro thought,
killing and head-hunting were intimately associated with the possession of two
kinds of souls, the Arutam and the Muisak. While the former allowed its
owner to join a head-hunting expedition, the purpose of the latter was to avenge its
owner’s death. However, if a corpse’s head was shrunk, the Muisak soul was
irresistibly drawn into it and was powerless to escape.



Shamans of South America

the world-view of tropical forest societies,
everything that happens has a spirit-world cause or
consequence. All-powerful spirits are dangerously
ambivalent, and the shaman thus has a key role as an
intermediary with the supernatural world.

By virtue of his ability to persuade or cajole dangerous
spirits on equal terms, the shaman acts as sorcerer, curer,
diviner, dispenser of justice and upholder of the moral
code. He often conducts his spirit world activities in
nocturnal seance. Those shamans who identify with, or
magically transform into, a jaguar — South America’s
largest, most powerful predator — are the most feared
and respected of all. They dress in jaguar skins, wear
necklaces of jaguar teeth, and may even growl] like the jaguar
in ceremonies where the divine the future, cure magical
illness, ensure hunting success, or act as “supernatural warriors” 
by sending death and disease to enemy villages. usually experienced 
through hallucinogenic plants.

as those produced by ayahuasca, or vihoo snuff, are the
shaman’s window onto the spirit world, permitting him
to see and understand the true nature of things, explain
events and suggest courses of action. In the northwest
Amazon region, some of the drugs needed for
ceremonies used to be described as the jaguar’s drug or
the jaguar’s sperm, and were sometimes kept _in a

An Andean shaman in Colombia. A shaman’s visions are 1S
hollow jaguar bone.

The shaman’s vision quests are often imbued with
mythological significance, representing the primordial
activities of ancestor spirits.

In some societies, the shaman’s powers remain
effective after his death, continuing to protect his
community from malevolent spirits or from shamans from
other villages.

Often, however, the dead shaman’s soul is thought to
change into his dangerous alter ego the jaguar, and is
: greatly feared by the people. A 4S jaguar seen roaming near a
village or a graveyard at night believed to be the
transformed essence of the dead shaman.
