

Myths of metamorphosis; Orpheus

In Greek myths a crucial point in the narrative is often reached when a
character changes shape, typically taking on the form of a plant, animal or
some other natural feature. Among the best-known transformation myths
is the story of Halcyone (or Alcyone) and her husband Ceyx, who
presumptuously decided to call themselves Hera and Zeus. For this the
gods turned them both into sea-birds. For seven days each winter, Aeolus,
the king of the winds, kept the waves calm so that Haleyone, who had
become the kingfisher or halcyon, could sit on her eggs undisturbed —
hence the expression “halcyon days” to describe a time of peace and
contentment.

Two transformation stories involved the nymph Echo. In the more
famous of them, her garrulous stream of talk distracts Hera for long
enough to allow Zeus to leave the scene of one of his affairs undetected by
his wife. In punishment, Hera takes from Echo all but the briefest of
voices. Echo falls deeply in love with Narcissus, the beautiful son of
Cephisus, a river god, but when she tries to seduce him, all she can do is
repeat his last words. Echo pines away until all that is left of her is her
echoing voice. She curses Narcissus, who later comes to a pool and, seeing
a reflection of himself, falls in love with the beautiful image, which he
cannot possess. He too pines away, and as he dies he is transformed into
the narcissus flower.

In the second myth, Echo is pursued by Pan, the god of woods and
pastures, who was often portrayed with the legs and horns of a goat. She
rejects his advances and flees, but Pan, in his anger at this rebuff, drives a
group of shepherds mad, so that they pull the nymph apart. All that
remains is her wailing voice, which reverberates around the mountains.

Hera also features in the myth of Io, a lover of her husband Zeus. Io,
priestess of Hera, is the daughter of another river god, Inachus. Zeus
desires her and takes the form of a cloud to couple with her, but when
Hera grows suspicious he tries to deceive his wife by turning Io into a
beautiful white heifer. Pretending to be fooled, Hera asks Zeus for the
heifer as a gift, and once [o is in her possession she sets Argos, a hundredeyed 
monster, to keep a constant watch over her. To free his mistress Zeus
enlists the help of the wily Hermes, who lulls Argos to sleep with stories
see illustration, above right) and then cuts off his head. Not to be
outdone, Hera sends a gadfly to torment Io. Maddened by the insect, she
wanders the world miserably until she reaches Egypt. There, Zeus restores
her to human form with a gentle touch (epaphein) which at the same
moment impregnates her with a son, Epaphos, the founder of the royal
families of Egypt and Argos and ancestor of the Danaids (see p.162).

Teiresias or Tiresias, the most famous seer in the Theban legends, was
said to have lived for seven generations. In one account, he sees two snakes
copulating and strikes them with his stick, whereupon he is changed into
a woman. Eight years later he comes across the same snakes copulating,
strikes them again and is turned back into a man.

Later, Zeus and Hera are arguing about who has more pleasure in sex:
Hera contends that women have far less than men. Teiresias, as the only
person to know both sides of the story, is consulted. His answer, that
women have nine times more pleasure than men, angers Hera so much that
she strikes Teiresias blind. However, his blindness is compensated for by
the gift of prophetic insight. It is Teiresias who reveals that Oedipus has
killed his father and married his mother (see p.163).

Hermes prepares to cut off the head of Io’s
guardian Argos, whom the god has lulled
to sleep with his stories. A vase painting of
c.470BC.

ORPHEUS AND THE ORPHICS

One of the most widely known myths of
transformation was the story of Orpheus
and Eurydice, in which the great singer
succeeded in bringing his beloved back
from death in the underworld, only to lose
her again. Orpheus himself was
transformed from death to everlasting life,
albeit in dismembered form.

Orpheus, a Thracian, was the son of
Calliope, the Muse of epic poetry and
eloquence, and was renowned as the
greatest of all singers. He was married to
Eurydice and when she died he was so
broken by grief that he took his lyre and
entered the underworld itself. As he played
and sang, his music persuaded the gods of
death to allow Eurydice to return to earth,
on one condition: Orpheus must not look
round as he led her back to the light.
However, as he reached the exit of the
underworld, Orpheus was overcome with
fear and love and turned to look at
Eurydice. She slipped back into the
underworld forever. In his grief, Orpheus
rejected all advances from women. A group
of Thracian women became so incensed at
this that they dismembered him, but to no
avail: his disembodied head and lyre
continued to sing. A temple was built over
his head, from which prophecies were
delivered.
