 In the Oriental civilizations influenced by Hindu and
Buddhist philosophy it is commonly believed that reincarnational destiny
depends on the person’s conduct in earlier lives: the good are rewarded
sth incarnation in higher social castes or groups, the wicked in low-status groups, 
or as animals. Conversely, it is held that particularly virtuous
animals can be reincarnated as human beings.

Soul capture

Among the forest peoples of South America and the islands of Southeast
Asia it is commonly held that the soul resides in the human head, and
nother person’s soul can be captured by cutting off and ritually processing
 this part of his anatomy. Hence the custom of head-hunting in these
regions, and the abundance of myths on the topic. Cannibalism in South
America may be similarly aggressive, but can also be used as a means to
absorb the vital spiritual qualities of deceased relatives.

Shamans and shape-shifters
In tribal societies worldwide there are acknowledged experts in the exploration
of the invisible world of spirit. These adepts, who generally use their
discoveries for the benefit of their fellows, are termed “shamans” — a word
derived from the Tungus people of Siberia. Many myths derive from
shamanistic journeys into the spirit world, during which the shamans typically 
meet and converse with spirit beings, which are often encountered in
animal form. 

The shaman is said to leave his or her body while in a trance
state induced either by pyschotropic drugs or by the rhythmic sound of a
drum or rattle. Shamans all over the world tell similar stories of moving up
~ or down a mystical pillar or axis to explore the upper and lower regions
_ fof the cosmos. Often this pillar or axis is imagined in the form of a tree,
stretching from the underworld up to the sky. In those invisible realms
above and below the visible world of daily life the shaman is free of the
limitations of time, space and personal identity. He or she can assume the
attributes of powerful animals: the eagle or bear in North America and 
Osiris was king of the underworld in northern Asia, the jaguar in Central 
and South America, the lion and leop- ancient Egyptian myth, and kings were
ard in Africa. . thought to become Osiris when they died. 

Certain cults believed that Dream journeys immortality could be attained by
Many tribal peoples believe that the human soul temporarily leaves
following this god. He is depicted as a body during the dream-state, 
wandering in other worlds and meeting other — royal mummy with crossed arms, 
souls, including those of the dead. These nocturnal journeys have provided crook and a flail.
a great deal of material for myth-making. In North America and Southeast
Asia such voyages are thought to expose the errant soul to the danger of
abduction by a sorcerer or malevolent spirit; when this happens, local
shamans are customarily employed to search for and retrieve the lost soul.

