

Aeneas and Dido

the course of Aeneas’ wanderings around the Mediterranean,
before he arrived in Italy, he landed
at Carthage on the shores of North
Africa. There, according to Virgil’s
Aeneid, he fell in love with the
Carthaginian queen, Dido.

Dido was by birth a Phoenician from
the city of Tyre. Forced to flee her
homeland after the murder of her
husband, she was completing the
building of a new city at Carthage
when Aeneas and his men were
washed ashore nearby. She received
them lavishly, and almost at once
fell deeply in love with Aeneas.
Encouraged by her sister, Anna, she
began to accept her desire for the
stranger and to hope for marriage.

One day, when she and Aeneas
were on a hunting trip together, a
storm blew up, and Aeneas and Dido
found themselves sheltering alone in a cave. While the
storm raged, they made love. From then on, they lived
together as man and wife, and Aeneas behaved almost
as if he were king of Carthage.

When the messenger of the gods came to remind
Aeneas of his duty to found a new Troy in Italy, the
Trojan decided that he must leave his beloved and 
continue on his journey. Dido soon discovered what 
his intentions were, and confronted him with his treachery. 

Though himself deeply upset,
Aeneas could only plead that the
gods had compelled him, and begged
her not to make their parting doubly
difficult.

In despair, Dido resolved on
death. She built a vast funeral pyre
for herself, pretending it was for a
magical rite to bring Aeneas back, or
at least to cure her love. After a
sleepless night she rose to see
Aeneas’ ship already at sea. Cursing
him and praying for everlasting
enmity between Carthage and
Aeneas’ descendants, she climbed
the pyre and, taking her lover’s
sword, mortally stabbed herself.

Aeneas did not escape Dido
entirely. On a visit to the underworld, he met her ghost and
attempted once more to justify his
conduct. But Dido would not speak
with him, and slunk away to be with the ghost of her
husband.

. The legend of Dido and Aeneas had close links with
Rome’s political and military history. Dido’s prayer for
enmity between Carthage and Rome provided a
mythological justification for Rome’s war against the
Carthaginian Hannibal (218-2018c).
