
SHIVA'S FAMILY CIRCLE

Shiva, Parvati, Skanda, Ganesha

Hindu art often portrays the members of
the family sitting in a cosy circle, although
this is hardly an ordinary family (see
below). In this tableau, each of the family
has a vahana or mount, representing an
aspect of the deity’s nature. For example,
Parvati has the lion (ber killer instinct, as
Durga), Ganesha his rat or mouse (ability
to overcome obstacles).

SKANDA AND GANESHA

Skanda’s birth is usually linked with the
first lovemaking of his parents. This is
interrupted by the gods (who fear the
offspring will possess excessive powers).
Shiva spills his semen, and the fiery
substance, too hot to handle, passes from
one god to another until it reaches the
Ganga, where it is incubated. Suckled by
the six Krittikas (the personified Pleiades),
Skanda defeats the demon Taraka and so
rescues the world. He becomes the general
of the gods and is accepted by Parvati as
her own child; indeed, milk flows from her
breasts in affection when she first sees
him.

Parvati wants a child of her own who
will protect her from intrusions. She
makes Ganesha out of the rubbings from
her body as she is bathing, and puts him
on guard outside her rooms. When Shiva
himself tries to enter, Ganesha refuses to
admit him; and Shiva knocks off his head.
Parvati demands he be brought back to
life. Shiva casts about for the first head he
can find as a replacement, and this is how
Ganesha gets his elephant head (below).

Domesticating the ascetic Shiva, Parvati introduces him to family life. The
texts often allude to domestic details, such as their son Skanda playing
with Shiva’s skull ornaments, or mistaking his crescent moon for a lotus
bud. Several myths record bickering between Shiva and Parvati. One starts
in playful mood: Parvati puts her fingers over Shiva’s eyes from behind,
but this plunges the world into darkness, whereupon Shiva angrily makes
a third eye appear in his forehead. Sometimes they squabble over dice, or
Shiva taunts Parvati with being dark-skinned, so she performs austerities
to gain a golden complexion (in some versions her discarded dark
complexion becomes Kali). Bengali myths often portray Shiva as a
cannabis-smoking layabout, Parvati as a grumbling if long-suffering wife.