

Similarly, tonal dialogue tags should be used sparingly: he said with relish; she
added limply. Such phrases are blatant “telling,” and the chances are that good
dialogue will convey its own tone. “Get off my case!” she said angrily. We do not
need to be told that she said this angrily. If she said it sweetly, then we would
probably need to be told. If the dialogue does not give us a clue to the manner
in which it is said, an action will often do so better than an adverb. “I’ll have a
word with Mr. Ritter about it,” he said with finality is weaker than “I’ll have a word
with Mr. Ritter about it,” he said, and picked up his hat.

It helps to make the dialogue tag unobtrusive if it comes within the spoken
line: “Don’t give it a second thought,” he said. “I was just going anyway.” (A midline
tag has the added benefit of helping readers hear a slight pause or change in the
speaker's inflection.) A tag that comes at the beginning of the line may look too
much like a play script: He said, “Don’t give it a second thought...” whereas a tag
that comes after too much speech becomes confusing or superfluous: “Don’t give
it a second thought. I was going anyway, and Ill just take these and drop them at the
copy shop on the way,” he said. If we didn’t know who was speaking long before
this tag appears, it’s too late to be of use and simply calls attention to itself.

Vernacular. Vernacular is a tempting, and can be an excellent, means of
characterizing, but it is difficult to do well and easy to overdo. Dialect, 
regionality, and childhood should be achieved by word choice and syntax.
Misspellings should be kept to a minimum because they distract and slow the
reader, and worse, they tend to make the character seem stupid. There is no
point in spelling phonetically any word as it is ordinarily pronounced:
Almost all of us say things like “fur” for for, “uv” for of, “wuz” for was, “an”
for and, and “sez” for says. It’s common to drop the g in words ending in ing.
When you misspell these words in dialogue, you indicate that the speaker is
ignorant enough to spell them that way when writing. Even if you want to
indicate ignorance, you may alienate the reader by the means you choose to
do so. John Updike puts this point well when he complains of a Tom Wolfe
character:

[His] pronunciations are steadfastly spelled out—‘sump’m’ for ‘something,’
‘far fat’ for ‘fire fight’-—in a way that a Faulkner character would be spared.
For Faulkner, Southern life was life; for Wolfe it is a provincial curiosity. ...

It is largely to avoid the charge of creating “provincial curiosities” that most
fiction writers now avoid misspellings.

It can be even trickier catching the voice of a foreigner with imperfect English, 
because everyone has a native language, and when someone whose native
language is French or Ibu starts to learn English, the grammatical mistakes
they make will be based on the grammatical structure of the native language.
Unless you know French or Ibu, you will make mistakes, and your dialogue is
likely to sound as if it came from second-rate sitcoms.


I vernacular or standard English, the bottom-line rule is that dialogue
must be speakable. If it isn’t speakable, it isn’t dialogue.

“Certainly I had had a fright 1 wouldn’t soon forget,” Reese would say
lnter, “and as I slipped into bed fully dressed except for my shoes, which
I flung God-knows-where, I wondered why I had subjected myself to a
danger only a fool would fail to foresee for the dubious pleasure of
spending one evening in the company of a somewhat less than
brilliant coed.”

Nobody would say this because it can’t be said. It is not only convoluted
leyond reason but it also stumbles over its alliteration, “only a fool would fail
tv foresee for,” and takes more breath than the human lungs can hold.

Read your dialogue aloud and make sure it is comfortable to the mouth, the
heath, and the ear. False, flabby, do-nothing dialogue will reveal itself, as will
places that drag or seem rushed. This is the best way possible to tell if it’s all
coming together.

DIALOGUE TIPS

1. Have your characters speak no more than three sentences at a
time—unless you have a good reason to do otherwise.

2. Dialogue is more interesting when characters are saying no
to each other.

3. Keep exposition out of dialogue

4. Let your characters sometimes conceal or avoid instead
of saying exactly what they mean.

5. Use “said” as a dialogue tag whenever possible.

6. Use an action rather than a modifier to show how a character
is feeling.

7. Cut to the chase. Don’t use dialogue that doesn’t move the
story forward and reveal character.

8. Don’t let your characters be too articulate. Fragments are fine.
Don’t force conversations to follow a logical order (question
followed by answer). No need to stay on the same subject or
include clear transitions from one subject to another.

9. Vernacular is best conveyed by word choice and syntax as
opposed to misspellings.