

himself, slowly comes to develop, first, an awareness of himself from the
reader's vantage point (objectivity); next, a capacity to put himself imaginatively 
in the mind of the reader (empathy); and finally, an appreciation
of the reader's rights and feelings (courtesy). You can see that the young
writer is essentially retracing, in a new context, the same psychic journey
he traveled as a child. Even the net result is comparable. Having passed the
last stage of courtesy as a child, he achieved the mark of a truly civilized 
person: social sensitivity. When he passes the same stage as a writer, he achieves
the mark of a truly civilized author: a readable style.

The Veteran

The thinking process of a skilled writer reflects how she conceives the
writing situation. Let’s start, then, by developing a realistic understanding
of what that situation involves.

All writing is communication. But most writing hopes to go further.
It hopes to make the reader react in certain ways—with pleased smiles,
nods of assent, stabs of pathos, or whatever.

Now for an essay writer, the chief desired effect is persuasion. 
Suppose you are that writer. You want your readers to buy two things: your
ideas and you, their-source. That is, you want them to view your ideas as
sound and interesting, and to view you as smart, informed, direct, and companionable. 
(All of these things, of course, are desired effects.) If you don’t
persuade them to accept you, it’s doubtful that youll persuade them to
buy the ideas you're proffering. We buy from people we like and trust—
it’s human nature.

The big question, then, is how to win readers? Here are four essentials:

1. Have something to say that’s worth their attention.

2. Be sold on its validity and importance yourself so you can pitch it with conviction.

3. Furnish strong arguments that are well supported with concrete proof.

4. Use confident language—vigorous verbs, strong nouns, and assertive
phrasing.

While that looks like a pretty full recipe for successful writing, it isn’t.
Even if we exclude sheer artfulness, one thing is still missing—and almost
always is. The ultimate way we win readers is by courteously serving them—
that id, satisfying their needs. An experienced writer knows that to serve well
in to sell well; equally, to sell well is to serve well. They are complementary
activities. The means are inseparable from the ends.

The writer, for all practical purposes, does not exist without the assent 
of his readers, who have the power to shut him off at whim. This fact
of life makes pleasing them absolutely critical. But that’s only fair. If we’re
yoing to ask them to give us their time and attention, then we're in their
debt, not the other way around; we must be prepared to repay their kindness 
with kindness of our own. 

Beyond pleasing them simply to square debts and keep them reading, though, 
there’s also the practical necessity of pleasing them in order to persuade them. 
Samuel Butler long ago remarked, “We are not won by arguments that we can analyze, 
but by tone and temper, by the manner which is the man himself.” I don’t wholly agree
with that, but it’s certainly close to the truth. A pleasing manner surely
makes one’s arguments themselves seem pleasing because it dresses them
in an aura of reasonableness.

All of us, I think, grasp these facts of life perfectly well as readers, but
most of us manage to forget them as writers. Being unconsciously self-oriented, 
we think it’s enough simply to lay out our ideas. Experience keeps
disproving us, though. Readers will always insist on having their needs
looked after, as they have every right to, and if we're heedless, they'll say
“Enough of you” and toss our piece aside.

How, then, do you serve your reader? First, you must cultivate a 
psychological sense. That is, you must sensitize yourself to what wins you
over—how and why you respond, and what makes you feel well served—
and gradually learn to extend that awareness to your reader. This book, 
incidentally, is as good a place as any to start sensitizing yourself. As you read
along, you ought to be asking yourself such questions as these: “Is his style
too complex to be readable, or too plain, or is it just right—and why?”
“What is his tone, and how does he achieve it? Do I like it or don’t I?”
“Why does he use a semicolon here instead of a period?” “Do I like 
this two sentence paragraph?” “What effect do his contractions have on mer” A
writer eager to improve his psychological sense never simply reads; he
reads critically. His mind is always alert to the manner as well as the message, 
for only in this way will he learn what works and why it works, plus
what doesn’t work and why it doesn’t. He’s like one musician listening to
the chords and phrasing of another. What's special he’ll imitate and make
his own.