

But such flashy exhibitionism, accompanied by the pseudo-scholarship 
of a bright sophomore, has about as much appeal as graffiti on the
outer walls of Notre Dame. Quinn is an intellectual streaker, mooning
his way through the English language, but he writes with a matador’s
skill at teasing a bull, and his polemics serve a useful purpose. He
compels us to think about values.

Are there values? If He do his chores this morning is just as ‘‘good”’ a
sentence as He did his chores this morning, then the game is up. In this
event, it makes no difference how we write, on account of the whole
idea, y’know, is just that somebody dig what we say, get it? Right! But if
there are qualitative differences—if there are enduring values—then
these differences merit our careful consideration.

Let me offer an analogy: In 1969 my wife and I built our home in the
Blue Ridge Mountains. Good fortune led us to a wonderful old man,
Arthur Griffith by name. He called himself a carpenter; he was in fact a
cabinetmaker. Mr. Griffith discarded lumber he regarded as inferior. He
would cut a board, and test it, and trim a little, and test it, and take off a

little more with his plane, and finally he would fit the board precisely.He .

cut every mortise as if he were a jeweler cutting the facets of diamonds.
He sandpapered; he polished; he filled every nail hole. He made square
corners. He cared.

Ten years later, when a tool shed needed building and Mr. Griffith
was unavailable, we hired a jackleg. He was the Quinn of carpentry. He
sawed a mortise by kind of squinting at the board. His joints gapped like
the teeth of a six-year-old. When he finished, the shed was a functional
shed. Nothing more could be said for it.

Yes, there are qualitative standards in writing. The good craftsman
will go at every sentence as Arthur Griffith went at the kitchen cupkeen-edged 
tools of our trade. John Updike set the standard for writers to
aspire to: It is ‘‘to work steadily, even shyly, in the spirit of those
medieval carvers who so fondly sculpted the undersides of choir seats.””
To be sure, that standard is not necessarily the standard we employ in
writing a letter to the gas company, but it is important to understand that
such a standard exists.

One of the melancholy truths of our time is that many young people
are largely unaware of what writing is all about. Doubtless this has been
true throughout all ages; until this century, only a privileged few had
much of an education beyond elementary school. But it is poignantly,
ironically true that among high school graduates, levels of achievement
_ in reading and writing have declined steadily in recent years. The
opportunities for enlargement of the mind never have been greater; a
_ technological revolution has swept over the old sedentary libraries,
_ endowing them with computers, cassettes, data retrieval systems, and all
_ the rest. Appropriations for public education have grown to a point that
Many states spend more than $3,000 a year on each pupil in average daily
attendance. Yet the more resources we make available, and the more
money we spend, the less we seem to accomplish. The 1983 report from
the National Commission on Excellence in Education brought in a sad
indictment of the public schools: They are drowning in rising tides of
‘mediocrity.

Professor Hugh Kenner of Johns Hopkins, one of the most literate
men in the land, has remarked that ‘‘most people today do less writing
than people did fifty years ago.’’ Obviously this is so. Once hostesses
wrote invitations to come to lunch, and prospective guests wrote notes in
reply. Once our political leaders wrote long and thoughtful letters—
individual letters—to their constituents. Form letters and robot typewriters 
have assumed this role. Business affairs that once were conducted
through correspondence now are conducted by telephone. The day
tapidly approaches when all the records of our civilization, or what
Passes for civilization, will wind up ona single floppy disk.

The National Commission estimated that 23 million American adults
must be judged ‘‘functionally illiterate by the simplest tests of everyday
teading, writing, and comprehension.’? W.H. Auden back in 1967
essed that ‘‘nine-tenths of the population do not know what 30 percent
of the words they use actually mean.”’ Standard tests of literacy among
high school students reflect a discouraging trend.

We are bound to ask ourselves why these things have happened.
Answers and explanations come from every quarter. It is first said that
school boards. ‘‘Secondary school curricula have been homogeized, diluted,
 and diffused to the point that they no longer have a central
urpose. In effect, we have a cafeteria-style curriculum in which the
pppetizers and desserts can easily

 Supreme Court, it is said, has made the bad matter of discipline
ven worse, by requiring full-blown due process hearings before a