
above all
accordingly (and so)
admittedly

again

also

besides

certainly
consequently (and so)
finally

first

for example

for instance

furthermore

hence (therefore)

however

in addition (besides,
also)

in conclusion

indeed (in fact)

in fact

It’s a rather overwhelming list, isn’t it? (And it’s only a partial
one.) But the sheer number of transitional words indicates, among
other things, just how important signposting an argument really is,
Continuity doesn’t magically happen; it’s created. The surest way your
reader will know how your ideas connect is by your telling her. These
are the words you tell her with. I suggest you keep the list propped
up before you the next few times you write an essay. It will remind
you to give your reader the directional signals she needs; it will save you
word-hunting; and (a nice bonus) it will suggest an occasional new avenue
of thought simply by tempting your mind to explore other direct lines
of argument—a “nevertheless” thought, perhaps, or a “consequently,
a “for example.”

in particular
instead
in summary
likewise (and)
moreover

more specifically

(for example)

nevertheless (but)
nonetheless

on the other hand
rather (however, instead)
second

similarly

still

then

therefore

though

thus (therefore, so)
to sum up

Middles 47

Final Tips

1. “Well, what does it finally add up to?” This is the reader's invariable question.
 Your essay is the reply: “It finally adds up to this, in my
opinion. . . .” Don’t begin writing a final draft (there may be more than
one!) until you have asked yourself the reader's question and understand
clearly your intended reply. If your reply contains an original perception,
if it’s debatable, and if you've been able to state it in one sentence, it’s a good
thesis. Now go ahead and prove it.

2. Think of yourself as a prosecuting attorney, think of your essay as
a case, and think of your reader as a highly skeptical jury.

3. To prove your case, you'll generally have to substantiate several
things. The prosecutor, for example, must substantiate that the defendant
had the motive, the means, and the opportunity to commit the crime, So
determine what things you must substantiate, classify your evidence according 
to those things, and then substantiate them, one at a time. This is
led “dividing up the proof.” If you follow this procedure, you'll find that
structuring your essay is relatively simple.

4. Signpost your argument every step of the way. If you have three
important pieces of evidence to support a particular contention, tell your
reader so she can understand precisely where you're going. For instance:
three examples will bear this out. F irst, the original treaty of 1923... .”
similarly, if you have three arguments and if one is stronger than the other,
save it for last and label it as the strongest. For instance: “Finally and
most seriously, capital punishment strikes at the very basis of morality itself.”

5. Assertions are fine, but unless you prove them with hard evidence,
Wy remain simply assertions. So, assert, then support: assert, then support
assert, then support—and so ont roughout your essay. Remember, examined facts are 
the meat of it, They do the actual convincing; they also
© their own eloquence.

6. Some paragraphs, like transitional and one-sentence paragraphs, are
ial-occasion devices and follow their own rules, (I'll be speaking more about
ii later.) The normal paragraph, though, resembles a good essay: it has unity
tue of being organized around a single major point. Several examples may
fought in to support that point, and several ideas to qualify it, and several
ices to illuminate its implications, but there’s still only a single major point.
Main contention per paragraph”— it’s a sensible guideline to follow. If
ont follow it, your points will tend to get lost, and so will your reader,