Paul Burka, a National Magazine Award-winning journalist and executive editor
of Texas Monthly, told one of my classes, “The hardest thing a writer has 
to do is curb his self-indulgence.”

A beginning chess player faces many of the same problems. Lacking
any kind of “chess sense,” as players call it, he sits bewildered 
at the board, moving first a pawn, then a bishop, then—why not?—his 
queen, all at random, hoping that something good will come of it but 
knowing that if it does, it will be a mere piece of luck. He has no idea 
how seasoned players think at the board. Even sitting across from them, 
he cannot fathom what they're trying to accomplish with a particular move, 
what blunders they're trying to avoid, what alternate game strategies they 
might be considering. He can certainly appreciate the effects, but the 
actual thought process is a mystery.

Unfortunately, the grandmasters have made it far easier for a novice
to acquire chess sense than authors have made it for him to acquire 
its literary equivalent. They've published book after book explaining how to
think chess—what opening gambits to consider, what counterattacks work
well, what endgame tactics to use. Authors of writing texts, on the other
hand, tend to stress mechanics, perhaps assuming that people either know
how to think or they don’t.

I hope to repair that neglect. My chief aim, both in this chapter and
throughout the book, is to help you develop “writer's sense.” You'll find it
as indispensable as radar to a pilot. Tl begin by explaining how a novice
writer typically thinks so that when I move on to explain how the veteran
thinks, you'll have a more vivid sense of the contrast.

The Novice

Most of the novice’s difficulties start with the simple fact that the
paper he writes on is mute. Because it never talks back to him, and 
because he’s concentrating so hard on generating ideas, he readily forgets—
unlike the veteran—that another human being will eventually be trying to
make sense of what he’s saying. The result: His natural tendency I as a writer
is to think primarily of himself—hence to write primarily for himself. Here,
in a nutshell, lies the ultimate reason for most bad writing.*

He isn’t aware of his egocentrism, of course, but all the symptoms
of his root problem are there: he thinks through an idea only until it is
clear to him, since, for his purposes, it needn't be any clearer; 