

Communism started from zero forty-three years ago and today it
rigidly controls one-third of mankind and has penetrated and
softened up in varying degrees the remaining two-thirds: was this
phenomenal development inevitable? The victory of Communism in
the late forties in China means that the largest compactly
homogeneous mass of humanity, numbering some 600 million
people, are now sworn enemies of everything free and Western: was
this development inevitable? The Korean War, despite all its heroic
exertions, ended in a draw: was this outcome inevitable? In
Southeast Asia there has occurred during the last ten years an
advance of Communism and a retreat of freedom: was this advance
and retreat inevitable? 

Whereas international Communism was effectively absent from the 
Middle East ten or fifteen years ago, and in the consideration of 
Middle-Eastern problems Communism was treated as though it did not 
exist, international Communism enters decisively today into the 
determination of every Middle-Eastern problem: was this development 
inevitable? 

Whereas ten or fifteen years ago Communism was effectively absent from Latin America,
today it is visibly present: was this development inevitable? The
Communist Party, receiving orders directly from Moscow, is
certainly more active and influential today in Asia and Africa than
ten years ago, and several responsible United States Officials said
recently that the Communists have markedly intensified their
activity in the United States: was this Penetration inevitable ?

Malik hammered that word inevitable into our heads as if he were driving
Tailway spikes. Granted, this was a speech, not an essay, but the
Principle is the same. I remember an editorial in the midst of the war in
Vietnam, though I cannot cite the publication, in which each sober
paragraph of a grim recital ended witha single question: Js it worth it? It
was a marvelously effective device.

Beware the tool of alliteration. It must be used with extreme care. If
we put it purposely to work in every paragraph of our prose, we probably
will not prompt our patient readers into palpably protracted panegyrics.
Keep in mind that two things are going on whenever we read: We are
seeing the words with our eyes; we also are hearing them subconsciously
through our inner ears. This is what a musician does when he is reading,
but not actually playing, a score: He reads the notes in silence, but he
hears the sound in his head. Used softly and subtly, and without calling
attention to itself, alliteration often can lend Vitality to a humdrum
passage. We ought to use this tool more often than we do.

The same suggestion applies to the device of onomatopoeia. It is like
one of a woodcarver’s tiny gouges; the occasions for its use are few, but
its usefulness belies the infrequency. If our bells do not merely ring—if
they clamor, clatter, jangle, tingle, or tinkle—we may add a vivid touch.
Our language has loud words and soft words; it has words to convey the
shrillness of a siren, the racket of a jackhammer, the swish of a quiet surf.

But here again, as in every other instance, the rule for onomatopoeia has
to be obeyed: Listen intently, and do not fake it. Sometimes an axe,
cutting into a tree, goes thud; sometimes it goes whack; it depends upon
the sharpness of the axe, the kind of tree being cut, the skill of the
woodsman, and the heaviness of the air. In our house we have two windup clocks. 
One goes plink, the other goes bong. If our purpose is to
transcribe sound, or to evoke the memory of sound, let us go at the task
with care—but let us try.

Back in Chapter 3, in speaking of the style of Gibbon, Macaulay, and
Burke, I touched upon the uses of antithesis. Let me return to the topic
here. It is among the most effective devices of prose style. Skillfully
employed, a touch of antithesis impinges on the ear with the same solid
satisfaction that one gets from hitting a clean forehand or closing the door
of a Mercedes-Benz.

Webster’s defines antithesis as ‘‘the rhetorical contrast of ideas by
means of parallel arrangements of words, clauses, or sentences.’’ 
Technically speaking, the element of contrast ought always to be present, but
less precisely, the art of antithesis is the art of parallel construction in a
compact form.

Familiar examples spring to mind from the world of politics. All of us
will recall John F. Kennedy’s inaugural: ‘‘Ask not what your country
can do for you, but what you can do for your country.’’ Many of us will
remember the explosion that followed Barry Goldwater’s famous line at
the Republican convention of 1964: ‘‘Extremism in the defense of liberty
is no vice! Moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue!’’ There was
John Mitchell’s gung-ho slogan: ‘‘When the going gets tough, the tough
get going.”’

The translators of the King James Bible delighted in antithesis: ‘“The