

“But she still has her magic circle,” I insisted. “Zog doesn’t know that.
He won't be able to touch her.”

Christine stretched out one hand, as if to ward off something invisible.

“She’s tricked Zog,” I said. “Now the Sea Fairies are inside the castle,
Trot is swimming ahead, and the Sea Fairies are behind her. They're going
to find the Queen.” I got to my feet. “She’s just behind that iron door.”

Christine, still on her knees, stared blankly in the direction I was
pointing. “Who will open the door?”

“You open it, Christine.”

Christine looked up at my face. I met her eyes and held them as long as
I could. She sighed, then got slowly to her feet, and squeezed her lids shut.
“I’ve opened the door. Now we’re swimming into the dungeon. We’re not
afraid but Zog is afraid. He’s afraid of mortals. If a mortal ever touches
him, he'll turn to ink. When he sees Trot, he shrieks. He shoots up through
the water. And now the Queen is waiting for the Sea Fairies. She’s smiling.
Her tail is covered with pearls, and all the goldfish in the dungeon have
made a golden cloak for her, the most beautiful cloak in the world.”

I felt my heart pounding. The color had come back into Christine’s
face. But then I heard the ominous sound of someone at the front door.

“What is it?” Christine touched my sleeve lightly. I couldn’t look at her.

“It’s Aunt Ellen!” cried Adele, running into the hall.

“Aunt Ellen?” Lucia said in a puzzled voice, following Adele.

Christine gasped. She took a step away from me. “She’s dead!” she
wailed. She ran into the hall.

I backed away. I backed away into the dining room. I heard
Mrs. Darrell’s voice, then a man’s voice. I backed into the kitchen, letting
the door fall shut behind me.

I put on my wet tennis shoes. It took me a long time to tie the laces,
because my fingers were shaking. I was buttoning my jacket when
Mrs. Darrell came into the kitchen.

“I want to thank you for coming over,” she said in a quavering voice as
she reached into her purse. She held out some bills.

“No, no, I don’t want any money,” I said. I clutched my books and
hurried out the back door.

It was much colder, and a wind was blowing, sweeping away the clouds,
and opening a space in the sky for a huge, white moon. I was startled by
the brightness. Ordinary fir trees had been transformed into glass. The

bare oaks and dying elms of the neighborhood were all sparkling. Their
weighted limbs made a crackling and popping sound. I had trouble keeping my balance as I walked down the alley. Car windshields were sheeted
with shiny ice. Garbage cans glittered in the moonlight. It was as if Zog had
worked one of his spells under cover of the black water. He had frozen the
kingdom of the Sea Fairies, and only Trot, the ordinary girl, was allowed to
swim to the surface to resume her life as if nothing had happened.


Imagine five or six city blocks could lift, with a bump, and float.
The impression the 804-foot-long Hindenburg gives on the ground is
that of an airship built by giants and excessive even to their purposes.
The fabric hull and mainframe curve upward sixteen stories high.

Meinert and Gniiss are out on the gangway ladder down to the
starboard #1 engine car. They’re helping out the machinists, ina
pinch. Gniiss is afraid of heights, which amuses everyone. It’s an open
aluminum ladder with a single handrail extending eighteen feet down
into the car’s hatchway. They’re at 2,000 feet aoe clouds below strand
dissipate. It’s early in a mild May in

The air buffets by at eighty-five miles per hour. Meinert shows
him how to hook his arm around the leading edge of the ladder to keep
from being blown off as he leaves the hull. Even through the a
gloves the metal is shockingly cold from the slipstream. The outer ue e
of the grip doesn’t provide quite the purchase they would wisn nen
hanging their keisters out over the a Atlantic. Every raised foot is
from the rung and flung into space.

Inside the cupola, they’re out of the blast, me
not the cold. Raising a head out of the shielded area is like being ore
by a bear. It’s a pusher arrangement, thank God. The back ends of t e
cupolas are open to facilitate maintenance on the blocks and oe
mounts. The engines are 1,100-horsepower diesels four feet high. me
propellers are twenty-two feet long. When they’re down on their _ s
and knees adjusting the vibration dampers, those props are a foot apy ~
half away. The sound is like God losing his temper, kettledrums in the
sinuses, fists in the face.

Meinert and Gniiss are both Regensburgers. Meinert was in his twenties
and Gniiss a child during the absolute worst years of the inflation. They
lived on mustard sandwiches, boiled kale, and turnip mash. Gniiss s most
cherished toy for a year and a half was a clothespin on which his father
had painted a face. They're ecstatic to have found positions like t is.
Their work fills them with elation, and the kind of spuriously ai
etary pride that mortal tour guides might feel on Olympus. Meals tha
seem giddily baronial—plates crowded with sausages, tureens ) one
platters of venison or trout or buttered potatoes—appear daily, ae in e
passengers have been served, courtesy of Luftschiffbau Zeppelin. Their