

The Stepmother takes the power back by blunt force: You may not go; you
must get us ready to go. Cinderella does so, and the three leave for the ball,

Then what happens? The Fairy Godmother appears. It is very powerful to
have magic on your side. The Fairy Godmother offers Cinderella a gown, glass
slippers, and a coach with horses and footmen, giving her more force than she
has yet had.

But the magic is not all-potent. It has a qualification that portends bad
luck. It will last only until midnight (unlike the Stepmother’s authority), and
Cinderella must leave the ball before the clock strikes twelve or risk exposure
and defeat.

What happens next? She goes to the ball and the Prince falls in love with
her—and love is an even more powerful weapon than magic in a literary wat
In some versions of the tale, the Stepmother and Stepsisters are made to mat»
vel at the beauty of the Princess they don’t recognize, pointing to the irony of
Cinderella’s new power.

And then? The magic quits. The clock strikes twelve, and Cinderella runs
down the steps in her rags to her rats and pumpkin, losing a slipper, bereft of
her power in every way.

Story Form, Plot, and Seructure 259

But after that, the Prince sends out a messenger with the glass slipper and a
dictum (a dramatic repetition of the original invitation in which all ladies
were invited to the ball) that every female in the land is to try on the slipper.
Cinderella is given her rights again by royal decree.

What happens then? In most good retellings of the tale, the Stepmother
also repeats her assumption of brute authority by hiding Cinderella away,
while our expectation of triumph is tantalizingly delayed with grotesque comedy: 
One sister cuts off a toe, the other a heel, trying to fit into the heroine’s
rightful slipper.

After that, Cinderella tries on the slipper and it fits. This is the crisis action.
Magic, love, and royalty join to recognize the heroine’s true self; evil, numbers,
and authority are powerless against them. At this point, the power struggle has
been decided; the outcome is inevitable. When the slipper fits, no further action
can occur that will deprive Cinderella of her desire. Nothing will be the same
again: The change in the lives of all concerned is significant and permanent.

The tale has a brief “falling action” or “walking away from the fight”: The
Prince sweeps Cinderella up on his white horse and gallops away to their wedding. 
The story comes to closure with the classic resolution of all comedy:
They lived happily ever after.

If we also look at “Cinderella” in terms of connection/disconnection,
we see a pattern as clear as that represented by the power struggle. The
first painful disconnection is that Cinderella’s mother has died; her father
has married (connected with) a woman who spurns (disconnects from)
her; the Prince’s invitation offers connection; the Stepmother’s cruelty
alienates again. The Fairy Godmother connects as a magical friend, but
the disappearance of the coach and gown disconnect Cinderella temporarily 
from that grand and glorious fairy-tale union, marriage to the Prince. If
we consult the emotions that this tale engenders—pity, anger, hope, fear,
romance, anticipation, disappointment, triumph—we see that both the
struggle between antagonist/protagonist and the pattern of alienation/connectedness
 is necessary to ensure, not only that there is an action, but also
that we care about its outcome. The traditional happy ending is the grand
connection, marriage; the traditional tragic outcome is the final disconnection, death.

ArT IS PLEASING YOURSELF....But you can please yourself and it
won't be art. Art is having the mastery to take your experience,
whether it’s visual or mental, and make meaningful shapes that convey a 
reality to others.

