
As in the conversation among Steve, Peter, and myself presented 
Hornyak points out the even more intriguing fact that these —
speakers often end a comment with the conjunction and, creating 
the appearance of interruption when there is none, as when Peg
says, “All that wet stuff and.” Hornyak claims that this strategy 
is used by many speakers in her family, and is satisfying and —
effective when used with each other. She is criticized, however, ‘
for using this same strategy among others, who protest that it
confuses them. They may even get the impression that someone
who ends a sentence with and doesn’t know whether or not she
is finished.



Why would anyone want to create the impression of interruption when there 
is none? One reason that speakers from some
cultural groups leave little or no pause between turns is that they
see silence in friendly conversation as_a sign of lack of rapport. »
Overlapping is a way to keep conversation going without risking
silence. I should note, though, that Hornyak and the family members 
she taped do not speak loudly or quickly or all at once.
Their overlaps, though frequent, are brief; ending sentences with
and is a way to achieve the appearance of interruption when there
is minimal overlap.

Though Hornyak feels the strategy of creating the appearance of 
overlap by ending a sentence with and is peculiar to her
family, others have commented that they know people who do
this. At least one man I spoke to said that his mother (to his
father’s chagrin) regularly ends her comments with and uh, and
that her mother and all her sisters do it too—but her father and
brother don’t. This man also considered this a family style.
 Although it clearly does run in families, the style seems to result
from a combination of gender and culture. '

Gender and culture also dovetail in another example of the
false appearance of interruption. William Labov and David Fanshel, 
in a study of a psychotherapy session between a nineteenyear-old patient 
called Rhoda and a social worker, show that
Rhoda never ended a speaking turn by falling silent. Instead, when
she had said all she wanted to say, she began to repeat herself.
Her repetitions were an invitation to the therapist to begin speaking 
by interrupting her. Both client and therapist were New
Yorkers, Jewish, and women.

CULTURAL EXPLANATIONS:
A MIXED BLESSING

The realization that people with similar cultural backgrounds have
similar ways of talking often comes as a revelation and a relief