

in front of us. That willingness to return to simply doing what we’re
doing while we’re doing it is enough to open our eyes and let seeing
happen. It is actually a radically different way of living. When we’re
not seeing, we get bored with our jobs, with our partners, with the
day-to-day events of our lives. We keep inventing sports and challenges 
to keep ourselves excited.

Ordinary life has its own rush. We feel it when, being completely present, 
we step out into the world. There can be a rush in
simply driving a truck or a bus, or digging a ditch, building a house,
washing clothes, doing the dishes, but only if we don’t blanket the
unknown manifestation of the moment with our preconceived notions. 
We just allow each event to be what it is, entering it completely.

For hundreds of years Zen artists have continually revisited the
same limited number of themes in their work, yet invariably, their
expressions are unique, fresh, alive, and fulfilling. Hakuin’s 
Bodhidharma is not the same as Sengai’s. Basho’s haiku are not the same as
Ryokan’s, though the two masters often wrote about the same subjects. 
In the art of shakuhachi, the same piece acquires a completely
different tenor depending on the mastery, and even the personality
of the artist who plays it. The ceremony of tea is made up of a very
specific and deliberate set of movements that does not leave much
room for spontaneity. And yet the process is different each time it is
practiced. It is given a particular life by the artist who creates it and
the uniqueness of the moment of creation. The same is true for all
art.

Most people have seen photographs of a sunset. But of the hundreds, 
thousands of photographs of sunsets, maybe one or two will
stand out, will really grab us with their force. Why? What was the
artist able to capture in such a way that the sunset became unforgettable?

My own photography students often complain that their photo-
graph of a sunset did not at all translate into the image. But, I tell